FAMILY
NURSE PRACTITIONER
CERTIFICATION
Intensive Review
F o u r t h  E d i t i o n MARIA T . CODINA LEIKPlus Interactive Digital Prep
   Family Nurse Practitioner 
Certification 
Intensive Review  
  Maria T. Codina Leik,  MSN, APRN, FNP-C, FNP-BC, AGPCNP-BC, is the presid ent and principal 
lecturer at National ARNP Services, Inc. Well known for her ability to simplify complex con-
cepts for her students, she is a popular speaker and educator. Ms. Leik previously taught in the 
nurse practitioner program at Florida International University Graduate School of Nursing, 
Miami, Florida. She is board certi/f_i  ed by the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) 
and the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certi/f_i  cation Board (AANPCB) in two 
specialties: family nurse practice and adult-gerontology primary care nurse practice. She has 
more than two decades of experience in clinical practice. Ms. Leik is a member of Sigma Theta 
Tau International Honor Society of Nursing. 
  Family Nurse Practitioner 
Certification 
Intensive Review  
 Fourth Edition
Maria T. Codina Leik, /m.sc/s.sc/n.sc, /a.sc/p.sc/r.sc/n.sc, /f.sc/n.sc/p.sc-/c.sc, /f.sc/n.sc/p.sc-/b.sc/c.sc, /a.sc/g.sc/p.sc/c.sc/n.sc/p.sc-/b.sc/c.sc  
 Copyright © 2021 Springer Publishing Company, LLC 
 All rights reserved. 
 First Springer Publishing edition 2007; subsequent editions 2013, 2018 
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of Springer 
Publishing Company, LLC, or authorization through payment of the appropriate fees to the Copyright Clearance 
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, info@copyright.com or on the 
Web at  www.copyright.com.  
 Springer Publishing Company, LL 
 11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036 
  www.springerpub.com  
  connect.springerpub.com/  
  Acquisitions Editor  : Adrianne Brigido 
  Compositor  : Amnet Systems 
  ISBN  : 978-0-8261-6372-1 
  ebook ISBN  : 978-0-8261-6373-8 
  DOI:   10.1891/9780826163738 
 20 21 22 23 24 / 5 4 3 2 1 
 The author and the publisher of this Work have made every effort to use sources believed to be reliable to provide 
information that is accurate and compatible with the standards generally accepted at the time of publication. Because 
medical science is continually advancing, our knowledge base continues to expand. Therefore, as new information 
becomes available, changes in procedures become necessary. We recommend that the reader always consult current 
research and speci/f_i  c institutional policies before performing any clinical procedure or delivering any medication. The 
author and publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in 
part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance on, the information contained in this book. The publisher has no responsibil-
ity for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party Internet websites referred to in this publication 
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate. 
  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data   
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2020917893  
 Contact sales@springerpub.com to receive discount rates on bulk purchases. 
  Publisher’s Note:   New and used products purchased from third-party sellers are not guaranteed for quality, authen-
ticity, or access to any included digital components.  
 Printed in the United States of America. 
 What a great time to be a nurse practitioner. 
This is  our  decade, girls (and guys). I dedicate this book to you. 
What a privilege it is to be able to make a difference in someone’s life. 
Wow. 
 Of course, my grateful thanks to 
Ed, Mary, and Chrissy. 

vii  Contents  
  Contributors and Reviewers    ix
  Preface  xi  
  Acknowledgments  xiii  
  I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION  
   1. Certi/f_i  cation Exam Information  3  
   2. Question Dissection and Analysis     21  
  II. PHARMACOLOGY AND HEALTH SCREENING OVERVIEW  
   3. Pharmacology Review  59  
   4. Health Promotion, Screening, and Disease Prevention Review  95  
  III. SYSTEMS REVIEW  
   5. Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat Review  113  
   6. Integumentary System Review  143  
   7. Cardiovascular System Review  181  
   8. Respiratory System Review  219  
   9. Endocrine System Review    245
  10. Gastrointestinal System Review    263
  11. Genitourinary and Renal System Review    283
  12. Nervous System Review    295
  13. Hematopoietic System Review    319
  14. Musculoskeletal System Review    333
  15.  Psychiatric–Mental Health Review     359
  IV. REPRODUCTIVE REVIEW  
  16. Male Reproductive System Review    381
  17. Female Reproductive System Review    393
  18. Female Reproductive System Review: Pregnancy and Childbirth    421
  19. Sexually Transmitted Diseases and Infections Review    445
viii    CONTENTS
  V. PEDIATRICS AND ADOLESCENTS REVIEW  
  20. Pediatrics Review: Newborns and Infants    465
  21. Pediatrics Review: Toddlers (Age 2–3 Years)    487
  22. Pediatrics Review: School-Age Children (Age 4–11 Years)    495
  23. Adolescents Review    507
  VI. GERONTOLOGY REVIEW  
  24. Body and Metabolic Changes in the Older Adult    521
  25. Common Disorders in Geriatrics    529
  VII. PROFESSIONAL ROLE REVIEW  
  26. Ethical Guidelines and Advanced Practice Law    551
  27. Professional Roles and Reimbursement    565
  28. Cultural and Spiritual Health Beliefs    573
  29. Nursing Research    581
  30. Evidence-Based Medicine and Epidemiology    589
  VIII.  PRACTICE TESTS   
  31. Practice Test I    599
  32. Practice Test I: Answers    623
  33. Practice Test II    643
  34. Practice Test II: Answers    667
  35. Practice Test III    687
  36. Practice Test III: Answers    715
  37. Practice Test IV    735
  38. Practice Test IV: Answers    763
  Abbreviations and Acronyms  785  
  Resources  793  
  Index  811  
ix  Contributors and Reviewers  
  Contributors and reviewers for the fourth and previous editions   
 Julie Adkins, DNP , APRN, FNP-BC, FAANP 
 Family Nurse Practitioner ,  Adkins Family Practice, LLC ,  West Frankfort, Illinois 
 Donna Bowles, EdD, MSN, RN, CNE 
 Associate Professor ,  Indiana University Southeast ,  New Albany, Indiana 
 Therese Boyd, EdD, ARNP , AGPCNP-BC 
 Nurse Practitioner,   Clinical Assistant Professor ,  Florida International University ,  Miami, Florida 
 Linda Carman Copel, PhD, RN, PMHCNS, BC, CNE, NCC, FAPA, ANEF 
 Professor ,  Villanova University College of Nursing ,  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
 Jill C. Cash, MSN, APRN, FNP-BC 
 Nurse Practitioner ,  Vanderbilt Medical Group at Westhaven Family Practice ,  Franklin, Tennessee , 
 Vanderbilt University Medical Center ,  Nashville, Tennessee 
 Tanya L. Fernandez, MS, PA-C, IBCLC 
 Assistant Professor ,  Department of Pediatrics ,  Child Health Associate/Physician Assistant Program , 
 University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ,  Aurora, Colorado 
 Lucille R. Ferrara, EdD, MBA, RN, FNP-BC 
 Assistant Professor and Director ,  Family Nurse Practitioner Program ,  Lienhard School of Nursing , 
 New York, New York 
 Susanne W. Gibbons, PhD, C-AGNP 
 Assistant Professor ,  Daniel K. Inouye Graduate School of Nursing ,  Uniformed Services University of 
the Health Sciences ,  Bethesda, Maryland 
 Frank L. Giles, PhD, CRC, CCM, NCC, LMFT 
 President ,  Giles & Associates, Inc. ,  Madison, Mississippi 
 Cheryl A. Glass, MSN, WHNP , BC 
 Clinical Research Specialist ,  KEPRO ,  TennCare Medical Solutions Unit ,  Nashville, Tennessee 
 Elizabeth Johnston Taylor, PhD, RN 
 Professor ,  School of Nursing ,  Loma Linda University ,  Loma Linda, California 
x    CONTRIBUTORS AND REVIEWERS
 Pamela L. King, PhD, FNP , PNP 
 MSN Program Director ,  Spalding University ,  Louisville, Kentucky 
 Liza Marmo, MSN, RN-BC, CCRN, ANP-C 
 Director, Clinical Services ,  Lehigh Valley Health Network ,  Allentown, Pennsylvania 
 Susanne J. Pavlovich-Danis, MSN, ARNP-C, CDE, CRRN 
 Director of Clinical Continuing Education ,  TeamHealth ,  Advanced Practice Registered Nurse , 
 Plantation Medical Clinic; ,  Nursing Professor ,  University of Phoenix–South Florida Campus ,  Miramar, 
Florida 
 JoAnne M. Pearce, MS, RNC, APRN-BC 
 Nursing Education Consultant ,  Idaho State University ,  Pocatello, Idaho 
 Sue Polito, MSN, RN, ANPC, GNPC 
 Specialist Professor ,  Monmouth University ,  West Long Branch, New Jersey 
 Dana R. Sherman, DNP , ARNP , ANP-BC, FNP-BC 
 Clinical Adjunct Faculty ,  Florida International University ,  Advanced Practice Registered Nurse , 
 Emergency Department ,  Mount Sinai Medical Center ,  Miami Beach, Florida 
 Cirese Webster, RN, CPN, FNP-BC 
 Nurse Practitioner ,  Metro Medical and Midwest Physicians; ,  Certi/f_i  ed Pediatric Nurse , 
 St. Louis Children’s Hospital ,  St. Louis, Missouri 
xi  Preface  
 Welcome to the fourth edition of  Family Nurse Practitioner Certi/f_i  cation Intensive Review  . This 
review book is designed to help you study effectively and ef/f_i  ciently for the family nurse prac-
titioner certi/f_i  cation exams of both the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certi/f_i  cation 
Board (AANPCB) and American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). 
 The goal for all of my nurse practitioner (NP) certi/f_i  cation review books is to provide you, 
the NP test-taker, with a tool to effectively and rapidly review and prepare for your exam. This 
book is also a valuable resource for current NP students and educators. Many students credit 
these books with helping them pass not only their certi/f_i  cation exam but also quizzes and tests 
when they were students. Students report that the review book has helped them successfully 
pass their school’s dreaded “exit” exam. 
 The book’s format remains the same as in the popular and best-selling /f_i  rst three editions, 
with the addition of several new features. The book is styled as a “mega-review” study guide 
because it combines six different resources in one: 
 1. Certi/f_i  cation exam information that is highly speci/f_i  c for both the AANPCB and ANCC 
exams 
 2. Useful test-taking techniques to help you prepare and strategize for exam day 
 3. Question dissection and analysis tools to help you break down questions for further study 
and hone critical-thinking skills 
 4. A thorough review of pharmacology; health promotion, screening, and disease prevention; 
and primary care diseases and conditions, with pertinent normal physical exam /f_i  ndings, 
danger signals, exam tips, and clinical pearls 
 5.  New:   End-of-chapter “knowledge check” questions designed to help you assess knowledge 
retention and application 
 6.  New:   Four full practice tests based on the blueprints for the AANPCB and ANCC certi/f_i  ca-
tion exams, with answers and detailed rationales 
 The fourth edition has been signi/f_i  cantly updated and features new disease topics, tables, 
procedures, and updated clinical content that relate to the latest exam questions, as well as 
many full-color images of dermatologic diseases and other conditions. In addition, it includes 
 hundreds   of new practice questions.   
 Readers receive 6 months of free digital access to the interactive digital version on 
ExamPrepConnect (see access details on inside front cover). Features include: 
  I All of the high-quality content from the book 
  I Personalized study plan based on exam date 
  I Ability to study by topic area to identify strengths and weaknesses 
xii    PREFACE
  I Timed practice tests that simulate the test-taking environment 
  I Discussion board to connect with the nurse practitioner exam-prep community 
  I Games to make studying fun 
 This book and my  Adult-Gerontology Nurse Practitioner Certi/f_i  cation Intensive Review   have 
become the most sought-after and relied-upon review books for use in studying for both 
the AANPCB and ANCC certi/f_i  cation exams. The contents and procedures in this book are 
designed for review purposes only. They are not intended for use in clinical practice. 
 If you have any comments or suggestions for this book or would like me to teach a review 
course at your institution, please contact me at npreviews@gmail.com. If you would like to 
attend one of my webinars or live-review courses, visit my website at  www.npre view.com,  
which is frequently updated with exam information,  updates , and new treatment guidelines.   
  Maria T. Codina Leik   
xiii  Acknowledgments  
 To my awesome editor, Adrianne Brigido, whose endless patience and support has helped me 
tremendously. I want to thank you and give you a big hug. I want to extend my gratitude to 
Springer Publishing Company, New York, and its staff. 
 I want to extend my deep gratitude to Ricardo G. Codina and Thelma Y. Codina. And, of 
course, kudos to Angelica, my assistant, who wears so many hats.       

I
Certification and 
Exam Information

3  1   Certification Exam 
Information  
   AMERICAN NURSES CREDENTIALING CENTER 
  www.nursingworld.org/ancc  
 Credential: FNP-BC 
 Toll-Free Phone: (800) 284-2378 
 Mobile App: MYANCC (Apple Store/Google Play) 
 Electronic Transcripts: aprnvalidation@ana.org 
 The American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) is the independent credentialing body of the 
American Nurses Association (ANA). It is the largest nurse credentialing organization in the United 
States. The current edition of the ANCC Family Nurse Practitioner (FNP) exam was released May 22, 
2019. 
 The ANCC currently offers certi/f_i  cation exams for the following nurse practitioner (NP) specialties: 
Family NP (FNP-BC), Adult-Gerontology Primary Care NP (AGPCNP-BC), Adult-Gerontology Acute 
Care NP (AGACNP-BC), and Psychiatric–Mental Health NP (PMHNP-BC). You must /f_i  rst establish an 
online account at the ANCC website before you can apply for any of the exams. You can use the mobile 
app MYANCC to apply or renew your certi/f_i  cation and keep track of your continuing-education (CE) 
hours. 
 Prometric Computer Testing Centers 
  www.prometric.com/ANCC  
 Toll-Free Phone: (800) 350-7076 
 Special Conditions Department (Special Accommodations): (800) 967-1139 
 The ANCC uses Prometric Testing Centers to administer its exams. Before you can schedule an 
appointment, you must have your candidate eligibility number; this is pr ovided in the Authorization 
to Test Notice letter sent to quali/f_i  ed candidates who meet eligibility requirements and have completed 
their application documentation. 
 You can schedule, reschedule, cancel, and/or con/f_i  rm an appointment at the website portal or by 
telephone. Prometric has 14,000 test centers in 180 countries, including the United States, Puerto Rico, the 
U.S. Virgin Islands, Canada, Venezuela, and the United Kingdom. There are also test centers in Africa, 
Asia, and Europe. 
  International Testing for Military Personnel  
 Military nurses who want to take the exam outside the United States are allowed to take their exams at 
one of Prometric’s “global” testing centers. 
  Qualiﬁ  cations  
 One must graduate from an approved master’s, postgraduate, or doctoral degree program with a 
specialization in family NP (plus the required minimum of 500 faculty-supervised clinical practice hours) 
from an institution of higher learning. The program must be accredited by the Commission on Collegiate 
Nursing Education (CCNE) or the Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing (formerly known 
as the National League for Nursing Accrediting Commission). In addition, the candidate must possess 
an active RN license in any state or territory of the United States. The ANCC will, on an individual basis, 
4    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
accept the professional legally recognized equivalent (of NP status) from another country if the applicant 
meets its certi/f_i  cation criteria. If the applicant is educated and/or licensed outside the United States, 
there are additional requirements. 
  AMERICAN ACADEMY OF NURSE PRACTITIONERS 
CERTIFICATION BOARD 
  www.aanpcert.org  
 Credential: FNP-C 
 Toll-Free Phone: (855) 822-6727 
 Certi/f_i  cation Administration: (512) 637-0500 
 Email: certi/f_i  cation@aanpcert.org 
 Electronic Transcripts: transcripts@aanpcert.org (via secure electronic transmission from registrar’s 
of/f_i ce) 
 The American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certi/f_i  cation Board (AANPCB) is an independent 
organization that is af/f_i  liated with the AANP and the American Academy of Emergency Nurse 
Practitioners (AAENP). 
 The AANPCB is currently offering three specialty exams: Family NP (FNP-C), Adult-Gerontology 
Primary Care NP (AGNP-C), and Emergency NP (ENP-C). The current FNP , AGNP , and ENP exams were 
released in February 2018. Their Adult NP exam was retired in December 2015, and the Gerontologic NP 
exam was retired in December 2012. 
 You must /f_i  rst establish an online account at their website before you can apply for the exam. 
Applicants enrolled in an MSN or post-master’s certi/f_i  cate program may begin the application process 
6 months before completion of the program. If you are enrolled in a DNP program, you can begin the 
application process as early as 1 year prior to completion of the program. But you must complete all 
the NP program didactic courses and supervised clinical practice hour requirements before you can sit 
for the exam. In addition, an of/f_i  cial transcript showing the doctor of nursing practice (DNP) degree 
awarded and conferral date is required to release your exam score. The certi/f_i  cation start date will be the 
date the score is released (not the date the examination was taken). 
 PSI Computer Testing Centers 
  www.psiexams.com  
 Toll-Free Phone: (800) 733-9267 
 Fax: (702) 932-2666 
 The AANPCB’s exams are administered by PSI Services LLC, which has more than 300 locations across 
the United States and Canada. Locations are listed on the PSI scheduling portal. Approved, quali/f_i  ed 
candidates who have completed their applications (/f_i  nal transcripts included) are sent an authorization 
to test by email from the AANPCB. Approximately 1 day after you receive the AANPCB email, PSI 
Services will send you your PSI eligibility ID number from support@psionline.com, providing a link to 
their online scheduling system (to schedule/reschedule/cancel/con/f_i  rm). You can also register by phone 
(800-733-9276).   Important information about applying for the AANC and AANPCB exams is provided in 
Table 1.1.  
   EXAM BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 The ANCC usually releases a new edition of their exam every 2 years. Each ANCC exam edition has 
several versions. The AANPCB is now releasing a new edition of their exam annually in January; each 
edition has at least two versions. If you have failed the exam and retake it, you will get a different version 
of the exam. The version of the exam that you are taking is assigned by the testing-center computer 
system. For example, you may be taking a different version of the exam than your classmate even though 
both of you are taking the same edition of the exam on the same date and time at the same testing center. 
1. CERTIFICATION EXAM INFORMATION    5
 Exam Format 
 The formats on the ANCC exam include “drag and dro p”; multiple-choice question with /f_i  ve or six 
answer options (you are asked to select all answers  that apply); “hot spot” (a picture is presented 
that is divided into four quadrants, and you click on the correct quadrant as the answer); and colored  
photographs of skin and eye conditions; EKG strips;  and chest x-ray /f_i  lms. These new formats are 
discussed in Chapter 2. Most questions on the ANCC exam are still multiple choice with four answer 
options. 
 Similarly, most AANPCB exam questions are the classic multiple-choice format with four answer 
options. There may be one EKG strip, a chest x-ray /f_i  lm, and some multiple-choice questions with /f_i  ve to 
six answer options (you are asked to select two to three answers). The exams are computer-based tests 
(CBTs). Unlike the NCLEX-RN ®  exam, which is a computer-adaptive test, the NP exams do not shut 
down automatically after you have earned enough points. 
 Test Content Outline and Reference List 
 Both the ANCC and the AANPCB provide test content outlines (TCOs) and a reference list on their 
website. It is important that you read these documents carefully and concentrate your studies on the 
designated topic areas. 
 Total Number of Questions and Time 
  I  ANCC FNP Exam (released May 2019):   There are 175 total questions. Only 150 questions are graded; 
25 are pretest questions that are not scored.  
  GG  Total Time:   Total counted testing time is 4 hours.  
  I  AANPCB: FNP Exam (released January 2020):   There are 150 total questions. Only 135 questions are 
graded; 15 questions are pretest questions that are not scored.  
  GG  Total Time:    Total counted testing time is 3 hours.  
 Computer Tutorial 
 For both exams, each testing session starts with a computer tutorial session of 10 to 15 minutes. This time 
is not counted as part of the testing time; it is “free” time. When the tutorial time expires, the computer 
will automatically start the exam, and the /f_i  rst question will appear on the screen. The countdown clock 
(upper corner of the screen) will start counting down the time. The countdown clock will not stop for 
“breaks,” but if you need a break, inform a testing center staff member who is monitoring the testing 
area. Watch the time clock closely because when the allotted testing time expires, the computer will 
automatically shut down the exam.   Table 1.1   Application Timeline for Certiﬁ  cation Exams   
  Timeline    Recommended Activities Before Graduation  
 6 months before graduation  Open an account on the ANCC and/or the AANPCB website and 
start the application process. Find out about the certiﬁ  cation 
requirements. Download and read the General Testing Booklet, 
Test Content Outline, and Reference List. Visit your SBON 
website and read the licensure requirements for NPs in your state. 
Download the licensure application. 
 4–6 weeks before graduation  Order three to four copies of your ofﬁ  cial ﬁ  nal transcript. 
 2–3 weeks before graduation  Ask the NP director of your program to sign the ANCC Education 
Validation form. 
 AANPCB, American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certiﬁ  cation Board; ANCC, American Nurses Credentialing Center; NP, nurse practitioner; 
SBON, state board of nursing. 
6    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
 Time Allotted per Question 
 For both the ANCC and AANPCB certi/f_i  cation exams, each question is allotted approximately 60 
seconds. If you /f_i  nd yourself spending too much time on one question, pick an answer (best guess), then 
“mark” it so that you can return to it later. Never leave any question unanswered. If you guess correctly, 
it will be counted; if you leave it blank, it is marked as an error (0 points). 
 Sample Exam Questions 
 I highly recommend that you try the free sample exams at the ANCC’s website even if you are planning 
to take only the AANPCB exam. The ANCC’s sample exam is web-based and contains 25 questions. It 
can be taken as many times as desired at no charge (and it is scored every time). The AANPCB also has 
free questions, which are listed on the last two pages of their candidate handbook (no answer key is 
provided). If you want to familiarize yourself with the format of the AANPCB exam, you can purchase 
their 75-item practice examination (timed 90 minutes), which is taken online and graded. It can be taken 
only once. The ANCC also sells sample exam questions, but their free web-based sample exam provides 
a good opportunity to practice using their exam formats. 
   COMPARING THE ANCC AND AANPCB EXAMS 
1.     What are the passing rates for the two exams?  
 ANCC FNP exam:  87% 
 AANPCB FNP exam:  86% 
2.     What is the major difference between the two exams?  
 There are two major differences between the two exams. First, the ANCC exam contains nonclinical 
questions. Second, question formats, such as drag and dr op, photographs, EKG strip, chest x-ray /f_i  lm, 
and multiple-choice questions with /f_i  ve to six answer options, were added beginning with the 2016 
ANCC exams. 
 The questions on the AANPCB exam are all on clinical topics. The current version (January 2020) 
does not contain nonclinical topics. Most of the questions are the classic multiple-choice format with four 
answer options, but there may be some multiple-choice questions that have /f_i  ve to six answer options 
(you are asked to select two to three answers). An EKG strip and/or chest x-ray /f_i  lm is not always 
included on the exam (AANCB and ANCC). 
3.     Are there apps from the Apple Store and Google Play?  
  AANC  : The ANCC has an app that can be used to apply for the exam. 
  AANPCB  : The AANPCB does not have an app currently, but it may have one in the near future. 
4.   What are the new commands in the ANCC Prometric exams?  
 You can now “highlight” words (keywords) to help you concentrate on the best clues (that you 
picked). You can also use the “strikeout” command, which allows you to cross out (eliminate) the answer 
option(s) that you think is(are) wrong (distractors). These two new commands are not yet available for 
the PSI AANPCB exam. 
5.     If I join their respective membership organizations, will I receive a discount on my fees?  
  ANCC:   To be eligible, you need to be a member of the ANA. If you belong to a state nursing association, 
you may already be a member of the ANA. Check with your state’s nursing association. To apply for 
membership, apply online at the ANA’s website ( www.nursingworld.org).  A word of warning : If you are 
not a member, you have only 5 business days after you apply for the exam to claim the membership 
discount. Exam discount claims received after this time are not allowed, and “refunds will not be issued.” 
  AANPCB:   To be eligible, you must be a member of the AANP ( www.aanp.org).  If you already applied 
for the exam as a nonmember, you have up to 30 days to apply for membership. To receive the membership 
discount (as a refund), inform them by email that you are a member (certi/f_i  cation@aanpcert.org). 
6.   How do I apply for the ANCC or AANPCB certi/f_i  cation exam?  
 For both agencies, you must initially open an online account on their website. To avoid loss of 
information, it is best to complete your online application within 30 days of starting it. The application 
1. CERTIFICATION EXAM INFORMATION    7
forms are in editable PDF format so you can enter the information directly on your computer and 
then print a hardcopy for your records. If you apply by mail, do not forget to photocopy the entire 
contents of your application package. If you plan on using the U.S. Postal Service to mail your package, 
it is recommended that you pay the extra fee for registered mail. 
  ANCC:   The ANCC accepts applications online and by email, standard mail, fax, and their mobile app 
MYANCC (Apple Store/Google Play). 
  AANPCB:   The AANPCB accepts applications online and by mail. Applying online does not expedite 
processing. The organization automatically charges a nonrefundable paper application processing fee for 
all paper applications (email, mail, and fax). There is no charge for processing of supporting documents 
for certi/f_i  cation and recerti/f_i  cation (e.g., unof/f_i  cial transcripts, RN license). 
7.   How early can I apply for the certi/f_i  cation exam?  
  ANCC:   The ANCC allows students to apply as early as 6 months before graduation. It will not 
process an application until payment has cleared. A completed application must contain a copy of 
your RN license, an of/f_i  cial copy of your /f_i  nal transcripts, and the original copy of the Validation of 
Education form, signed by your NP program director A Gap Analysis form (on website) is needed for all 
postgraduate certi/f_i  cates or doctoral degrees and should be sent with the Validation of Education form. 
  AANPCB:   Applicants enrolled in an MSN or post-master’s ce rti/f_i cate program may apply 6 months 
prior to graduation. DNP students may apply up to 1 2 months before graduation, but the AANPCB will 
not release the exam scores or grant certi/f_i  cation until the MSN or DNP degrees are issued. If you app ly 
before you graduate, you are required to submit an of/f_i  cial copy of your current transcript (the inter im 
transcript). The interim transcript is your most re cent transcript, which contains all the coursework that you 
have completed up to that date. When the of/f_i  cial /f_i  nal transcript is released, either you or the regi strar’s 
of/f_i ce of your school can mail or email it directly to  the AANPCB.   In addition, the AANPCB requires a 
hard copy of your RN license. Do not forget to down load the State Board of Nursing Noti/f_i  cation form 
from the board’s website so that it can release you r exam scores to your state board of nursing (SBON) . 
8.     How long does it take to process a completed application?  
  ANCC:   It takes about 4 to 6 weeks to process an application. Be warned that the ANCC will not 
process an application until it is complete and all required documents have been received (copy of RN 
license, original of the signed education validation form, /f_i  nal transcript). If there are problems with your 
application, an email will be sent to you. Answer all the questions on the forms, and do not leave any 
blanks. 
  AANPCB:   It generally takes between 4 and 6 weeks after you have paid the fees and submitted all the 
required documentation to process an application. Fill out all the questions, and do not leave any blanks 
or forget signatures. An error can delay your application signi/f_i  cantly. 
9.     What is the ANCC’s “expedited application” process?  
 This option shortens the processing time to 5 business days ($200 nonrefundable fee). Download 
and print the Certi/f_i  cation Expedite Review Request form from the ANCC website and fax it to (301) 
628-5233. If your school has not released your /f_i  nal transcript, it will delay the expedited application. 
The Validation of Education form can be signed by electronic signature (give your NP director’s email 
address), and an electronic copy of your /f_i  nal transcript can be emailed directly by secure transmission 
from your school’s registrar of/f_i  ce (aprnvalidation@ana.org). Call to verify that the ANCC has received 
your faxed application. 
  Note:   Mailing the ANCC “expedited” form will delay processing; it should be faxed. If you both fax 
and mail it, you will be charged the processing fee twice. 
 The AANPCB does not expedite applications. 
10.   What are the /f_i  nal transcript and the “of/f_i  cial” transcript?  
 The /f_i  nal transcript is the one that is issued after you graduate from your NP program. It 
should/uni00A0 indicate/uni00A0 the type of degree you earned along with the NP specialty (e.g., family or adult-
gerontology NP). 
 A transcript is considered of/f_i  cial only if it remains inside the sealed envelope in which it was mailed 
from your college registrar’s of/f_i  ce or if it is mailed directly from their of/f_i  ce to the certifying agency. An 
8    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
electronic copy of your transcript can be transmitted directly by secure transmission from the registrars’ 
of/f_i ce (aprnvalidation@ana.org). Order at least three to four copies of your /f_i  nal transcripts and keep the 
extras unopened to keep them of/f_i  cial. Open one copy (yours) and check it for accuracy. 
11.   What is the ANCC Validation of Education form?  
 This one-page form is a requirement for ANCC applicants only. Most NP programs have this 
document signed in bulk by the curr ent director of the NP program. Ideally, it should be distributed to 
the students before the /f_i  nal day of school. You must send the original signed form (not a copy) to the 
ANCC with your application. 
  Note:   It is probably a good idea for all NP students to get this document signed, even if they plan 
to take only the AANPCB exam. Because the ANCC requires this form, it will save you precious time 
in the future if you decide to apply for their exam. You always have the option of applying quickly for 
the “other” certi/f_i  cation exam if you fail the /f_i  rst. Do not forget that you will need another of/f_i  cial /f_i  nal 
transcript (another good reason why you should have at least four copies). 
12.   Is it possible to take the exams at any time of the year?  
 You can take both certi/f_i  cation exams at any time of the year, whenever the Prometric and the PSI 
testing centers are open. 
13.   When should I schedule my exam?  
 Do not wait until the last minute to schedule your exam because the testing centers in your area 
may no longer have the date (or the time) that you desir e. Morning time slots tend to get /f_i  lled very 
quickly. Both Prometric and PSI testing centers allow test takers to schedule, reschedule, or cancel an 
appointment on their website or by phone, but you should give them notice. 
  Prometric (ANCC):   The processing fee is charged if <30-days’ notice is given. 
  PSI (AANPCB):   Requires a minimum of at least 2 days in advance to reschedule or cancel an exam 
(before 5 p.m. Paci/f_i  c Standard Time). 
  Note:   Avoid scheduling yourself at the time of day when you tend to get tired or sleepy. For most, 
this is usually after lunchtime. Simply picking the wrong time of day can cause you to fail the exam, 
sometimes by as little as 2 points. 
14.   What should I do if the time slot or date that I want is no longer available?  
 Look for another testing center as soon as possible. For some, it may mean a long drive to another 
city, but it may well be worth the extra time and effort if your authorization-to-test letter is about to 
expire. 
15.   Can I take the exam if my name does not match my primary picture identi/f_i  cation?  
 The name that you used to register must match exactly the name on your primary picture identi/f_i  cation 
with signatur e. If it doesn’t, you will not be allowed to test. If you need to modify your name, call the 
ANCC as soon as possible prior to scheduling your appointment. 
16.   If I have a disability, how can I obtain special testing accommodations?  
You can download the Special Accommodations form from each organization’s website (ANCC 
and AANPCB). It requires a description of the disability and limitations related to testing. It should 
be dated and signed by the provider. For example, if a student has severe test-taking anxiety, a special 
accommodation (if approved) is an extension of the testing time. Check the agency’s website for further 
instructions.
  COMMON QUESTIONS ABOUT ANCC AND AANPCB EXAMS 
1.     What are the passing scores?  
  ANCC:   The passing score is 350 points or higher. ANCC scores range from 100 to 500 points. 
  AANPCB:   The passing score is 500 points or higher. AANPCB scores range from 200 to 800 points. 
1. CERTIFICATION EXAM INFORMATION    9
2.   Will I /f_i  nd out immediately if I pass (or fail) the exam?  
 Yes, you will. After you exit the testing area, ask the proctor to print a copy of your results (pass or fail 
format). This is the “unof/f_i  cial” score. If you pass the exam, you will not get a number score. According 
to the AANPCB, a preliminary “pass” score at the testing center is not considered of/f_i  cial noti/f_i  cation. It 
does not indicate active certi/f_i  cation status, and it may not be used for employment or licensure as an NP . 
A letter with your of/f_i  cial score will be mailed to you at a later date, indicating the type of certi/f_i  cation and 
the starting date.   If you fail the exam, you will receive a scaled number score with diagnostic feedback 
information for each domain such as: 
  I  Low:   Your score from this content area is below the acceptable level. 
  I  Medium:   Your score from this content area is marginally acceptable. 
  I  High:   Your score from this content area is above average. 
  I Concentrate your studies on the domain/category(s) in which you score “low” or “medium.” 
3.   How many times a year can I retake the FNP certi/f_i  cation exam?  
  ANCC:   You can take this exam up to three times in a 12-month calendar period. You must wait at least 
60 days between each exam. If you fail, you can reapply online (retest application), but wait about 5 days 
(after taking your exam) before you reapply online. 
  AANPCB:   You can take the exam up to two times per calendar year. Although there is no wait-time 
requirement prior to retesting, the AANPCB requires test-takers to take 15 contact hours in their area(s) 
with the weakest score (your “areas of weakness”). Reapply for the exam online by using the Retake 
Application form. 
  Note:   The CE hours that you took before sitting for the certi/f_i  cation exam are not eligible. The contact 
hours must be taken after you failed the exam. If you took a review course, it can be retaken again with 
the new dates. When you have completed the required 15 contact hours, email or fax the certi/f_i  cate of 
completion as proof. Call the AANPCB certi/f_i  cation of/f_i  ce /f_i  rst before faxing any documents. 
4.   What happens if I fail the ANCC or AANPCB exam the second time?  
 You must resubmit a full application along with all the required documentation (like the /f_i  rst time) 
and pay the full test fee. 
5.     What happens if my Authorization-to-Test letter expires, and I have not taken the exam?  
 Immediately call the certifying agency for further instructions. Both the ANCC and the AANPCB will 
allow you to r eschedule your exam (one time only). You must pay a rescheduling fee. If you fail to test 
on your extended testing window, you must reapply like a new applicant and pay the full registration 
fee again. 
6.     Is it possible to extend the testing window?  
  ANCC:   You can request (one time only) a new 90-day testing window. It must occur <6/uni00A0months from 
the last day of the initial testing window. Your request for extension to the ANCC should be received 
before the initial 90-day testing period expires. 
  AANPCB:   You can request an extension (one time only) by sending an email to certi/f_i  cation@aanpcert
.org. If an extension is granted, it will be for 60 days only. If you do not retake the exam during that time, 
you must reapply to take the examination (like the /f_i  rst time) and pay the full fee. 
7.   Is there a penalty for guessing on the exam?  
 No, there is no penalty for guessing. If you are running out of time, answer the remaining questions 
at random. Do not leave any questions “blank” or without an answer , because this will be marked as an 
error (0 points). You may earn a few extra points if you guess correctly, which can make the difference 
between passing and failing the exam. 
8.     Is it possible to return to a question later and change its answer?  
 Yes, it is, but only if you “/f_l  ag” the question. You will learn about this simple command during the 
computer tutorial at the beginning of the exam. “Flagging” a question allows the test taker to return to 
the question at a later time (if you want to change or review your answer). On the other hand, if you 
indicate to the computer that your answer is “/f_i  nal,” then you will not be allowed to change the answer. 
10    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
Do not worry about forgetting to “un/f_l  ag” the questions if you run out of time. As long as a question has 
an answer, it will be graded by the computer. 
9.     Does the certifying agency inform the SBON of my certi/f_i  cation status?  
 The AANPCB and ANCC will not automatically send your scores to the SBON. For both certifying 
agencies, you must sign their Release of Scor es consent form when you apply for the exam. 
10.   How can I obtain an “of/f_i  cial” veri/f_i  cation of my national certi/f_i  cation for my employer?  
 Both agencies have veri/f_i  cation request forms on their websites. If you just took the exam, the AANPCB 
recommends you wait at least 10 days after your testing date. A nominal fee is charged. 
11.      I am getting married (or divorced). Is there a problem with changing my legal name after I applied 
for the exams using my maiden or married name?  
 Yes, there may be a problem. The name that you use  in your application must be the same as the 
one listed on your primary ID (e.g., your unexpir ed driver’s license, passport, or military ID). Che ck 
the agency’s website or call for more details. If y ou get married after you applied for the exam, it i s 
better to wait until you have taken and passed the exam before changing the name on your driver’s 
license. 
 COMMON QUESTIONS ABOUT CERTIFICATION RENEWAL 
1.     How long is my certi/f_i  cation valid?  
 Certi/f_i  cation from the ANCC as well as the AANPCB is valid for 5 years. A few months before your 
certi/f_i  cation expires, both the ANCC and the AANPCB will send you a reminder letter. “Failure of the 
certi/f_i  cant to receive (his or her) renewal notice does not relieve the certi/f_i  cant of his or her professional 
responsibility for renewing their certi/f_i  cation.” 
2.     Can I still use my professional designations  after my certi/f_i  cation expires because I forgot to renew it?  
 No, credentials cannot be used once they have expired. 
3.     What should I do if I change my legal name, have a new email address, have a new telephone 
contact number , or move to a new address?  
 You need to update your online account at the ANCC or the AANPCB website within 30 days if there 
are any changes in your contact information, such as your legal name, residence address, email, or phone 
number. 
4.   Is there a time period that must be followed to renew certi/f_i  cation?  
 Yes, there is. All of the contact hours and practice hours must be completed within the current 5-year 
certi/f_i  cation period. 
5.     When should I submit my renewal application?  
 The process can be started as early as 12 months before your certi/f_i  cation expires. It is best to start 
early because if you do not have enough CE/clinical/pharmacology contact hours, you still have enough 
time to obtain them. Recerti/f_i  cation applications should be submitted no later than 12 weeks prior to the 
expiration date of the current certi/f_i  cation to allow time for reviewing, processing, and issuing the new 
certi/f_i  cate before the expiration of the current certi/f_i  cation. 
  Note:   Save a digital or hard copy (or other proof) of all your CE hours and clinical practice hours. 
If you are audited, you will be asked to submit proof of your CE hours (i.e., certi/f_i  cates) and clinical 
practice hours. 
6.   How many clinical hours of practice are required to renew my certi/f_i  cation every 5 years?  
 The ANCC no longer requires clinical practice hours for recerti/f_i  cation, although the AANPCB does 
require 1,000 hours of clinical practice in your area of specialty (completed in the previous 5 years before 
1. CERTIFICATION EXAM INFORMATION    11
recerti/f_i  cation), plus 100 hours CE, of which 25 hours must be pharmacology CE. If you plan to use your 
clinical volunteer hours as an NP , keep a notebook to record each clinical site’s address, the number of 
hours that you practiced, and the name/signature of the supervising NP/physician. If you do not have 
enough clinical hours, another method you can use to recertify is to retake the examination combined 
with the required CE hours. For  adult nurse practitioners (ANPs) and gerontological nurse practitioners 
(GNPs) , you do not have the option to recertify by retaking the examination, because the exams for your 
specialty have been retired. 
7.   How many CE contact hours are required for recerti/f_i  cation?  
  ANCC:   75 contact hours of CE are required. You also need one or more of the eight ANCC renewal 
categories (i.e., academic credits, presentations, preceptor hours, quality improvement project, 
professional service, practice hours, retake exam, publication or research). 
  AANPCB:   100 contact hours of CE are required. 
8.   How many pharmacotherapeutic contact hours are required per renewal cycle?  
  ANCC:   Of the 75 contact hours, 25 of those hours must be in pharmacotherapeutics. If you double the 
75 (150 contact hours), only 25 contact hours are required. 
  AANPCB:   Of the 100 contact hours, 25 contact hours of advanced pharmacology are required. 
9.   What happens if my certi/f_i  cation lapsed (I forgot to renew it)?  
 There is no “grace period” or backdating. On the day when your certi/f_i  cation expires, you are 
prohibited from using your designation after your name. In addition, you will have a gap in your 
certi/f_i  cation dates. The ANCC recommends that you check with your state licensing board to determine 
whether you can continue to practice as an NP . They also recommend that you check with your employer 
and with the agencies that are reimbursing your services. 
10.   If my specialty certi/f_i  cation exam was retired, can I continue with my specialty designation?  
 Yes, you may. You can renew your certi/f_i  cation only through CE and clinical hours. If you let your 
certi/f_i  cation lapse, you no longer have the examination option. Unless there are other options in the 
future (check the websites for updates), only students who have graduated from an AGNP program are 
permitted to take that exam. ANPs and GNPs are not allowed to take the AGNP exam. 
11.     Is there any reciprocity between the ANCC and the AANPCB?  
 No, there is not. Both the ANCC and the AANPCB discontinued their reciprocity program many 
years ago. 
   EXAM QUESTION CLASSIFICATION 
 American Nurses Credentialing Center 
 See Table 1.2 for the ANCC FNP exam domains.  
  Table 1.2  ANCC FNP Exam Domains   
  FNP Exam (Released May 2019)    % of Questions    Number of Questions  
 Assessment  21    31 
 Diagnosis  26    39 
 Clinical Management  43  65 
 Professional Role  10   15 
 Total  100  150 scored questions 
 ANCC, American Nurses Credentialing Center; FNP, f amily nurse practitioner. 
12    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
 American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certiﬁ  cation Board 
 See Table 1.3 for the AANPCB FNP exam domains and Table 1.4 for breakdown by patient age group.   
  Table 1.3  AANPCB FNP Exam: Domains   
  FNP Exam (Released February 2018)    % of Questions    Number of Questions  
 Assessment  36   48 
 Diagnosis  24    33 
 Plan  23   31 
 Evaluation  17  23 
 Total  100  135 scored questions 
 ANCC, American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certiﬁ  cation Board; FNP, family nurse practitioner. 
  Table 1.4   AANPCB FNP Exam: Age Groups   
  Age Group    % of Questions    Number of Questions  
 Prenatal  3  4 
 Pediatrics (includes newborn and infant)  14  19 
 Adolescent (early/late)  18  24 
 Adult  37  50 
 Geriatric  21  29 
 Elderly  7  9 
 Total  100  135 scored questions 
 AANPCB, American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certiﬁ  cation Board; FNP, family nurse practitioner. 
   FAST FACTS: ANCC AND AABPCB EXAMS 
1.    The ANCC FNP exam has approximately 10% nonclinical questions, or about 15 questions (out of 
150 graded questions). 
2.    The current AANPCB FNP exam released in January 2020 does not contain nonclinical topics. 
3.    The ANCC and AANPCB FNP certi/f_i  cation exams are designed for entry-level (not expert-level) 
practice. Most test-takers who sit for the FNP certi/f_i  cation exams are new graduates. 
4.    There are 25 pilot-test questions on the ANCC exam and 15 pilot-test questions on the AANPCB 
exam. These questions are not graded. There is no way to identify the  graded questions from the 
pilot-test questions . 
5.    New clinical information (treatment guidelines or new drugs) released within the 10 months prior to 
the current exam will most likely not be included. 
6.    Keep in mind that the questions will be on primary care disorders (e.g., primary care clinics, public 
health clinics). If you are guessing, avoid picking an exotic diagnosis as an answer. 
7.    The AANPCB exams will list the normal lab results when they are pertinent to a question. 
8.    Unlike the AANPCB, the ANCC does not list the normal lab results. If you are taking the ANCC 
exam, it is important to memorize some normal lab results and to write them down on scratch paper 
during the computer tutorial time period. 
9. Expect a few questions regarding pregnancy-related topics (obstetrics).
 IExample: Uterine involution is when the uterus contracts and shrinks in size until it returns to its 
prepregnancy state; the process takes about 6 weeks. 
10.     Learn the signi/f_i  cance of abnormal lab results and the type of follow-up needed to further evaluate 
the patient. 
 I  Example:   An elderly male patient complains of a new-onset, left-sided temporal headache 
accompanied by scalp tenderness and indurated temporal artery. The NP suspects temporal 
arteritis. The screening test is the sedimentation rate, which is expected to be much higher than 
normal (elevated value). 
1. CERTIFICATION EXAM INFORMATION    13
 I  Example:   A patient with an elevated white blood cell (WBC >11,000/mm 3 ) count accompanied 
by neutrophilia (>70%) and the presence of bands (“shift to the left”) most likely has a serious 
bacterial infection. 
11.    Expect to /f_i  nd many culture-related questions on the ANCC exam. 
 I  Example:   If a traditional Muslim woman refuses to undress and use a hospital gown, an 
alternative is to examine her with her clothes on (modi/f_i  ed physical exam). 
12.     The other cultures that may be addressed on the ANCC exam are Mexicans, Cubans, Chinese, 
Cambodians/Filipinos, and Native Americans (e.g., Navajo). Cultural topics are covered in this book 
in the nonclinical chapters. 
 I  Example:   A Navajo woman has an appointment for a follow-up visit, but she does not show 
up for the appointment. The most common cause for Navajo patients to skip health visits and 
follow-up visits is the lack of transportation. 
13.  Sometimes there will be one unexpected question relating to a dental injury. 
 I  Example:   A completely avulsed permanent tooth should be reimplanted as soon as possible. It 
can be transported to the dentist in cold milk (not frozen milk). 
14.  There may be a question on epidemiologic terms. 
 I  Example: Sensitivity   is de/f_i  ned as the ability of a test to detect a person who has the disease. 
 Speci/f_i  city  is de/f_i  ned as the ability of a test to detect a person who is healthy (or to detect the 
person without the disease). 
15.    Learn the de/f_i  nition of some of the research study designs. 
 I  Example:   A cohort study follows a group of people who share some common characteristics 
to observe the development of disease over time (e.g., the Framingham Nurses’ Health 
Study). 
16.    Several emergent conditions that may present in the primary care area will be on the exam. 
 I  Examples:   Navicular fracture, acute myocardial infarction (MI), cauda equina syndrome, 
anaphylaxis, angioedema, meningococcal meningitis. 
17.    Become familiar with the names of some anatomic areas. 
 I  Example:   Trauma to Kiesselbach’s plexus will result in an anterior nosebleed. 
18.    Some questions may ask about the “gold-standard test” or the diagnostic test for a condition. 
 I  Example:   The diagnostic or gold-standard test for sickle cell anemia, glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) anemia, and alpha or beta thalassemia is the hemoglobin 
electrophoresis. 
19.     Distinguish between /f_i  rst- and second-line antibiotics.  
 I  Example:   A 7-year-old child with acute otitis media (AOM) who is treated with amoxicillin 
returns in 48 hours without improvement (complains of ear pain, bulging tympanic membrane). 
The next step is to discontinue the amoxicillin and start the child on a second-line antibiotic such 
as amoxicillin–clavulanate (Augmentin) twice a day × 10 days. 
20.     Become knowledgeable about alternative antibiotics for penicillin-allergic patients. If the patient 
has a gram-positive infection, possible alternatives are macrolides, clindamycin, or quinolones with 
gram-positive activity such as levo/f_l  oxacin or moxi/f_l  oxacin. 
21.     If a patient has an infection that responds well to macrolides, but they think they are “allergic” to 
erythromycin (symptoms of nausea or gastrointestinal [GI] upset), inform them that they had an 
adverse reaction, not a true allergic reaction (hives, angioedema). 
 I  Example:   Switch the patient from erythromycin to azithromycin (usually a Z-Pack). 
22.     If a patient fails to respond to the initial medication, add another medication (follow the steps of the 
treatment guideline). 
 I  Example:   A patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is prescribed 
ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) for dyspnea. On follow-up, the patient complains that the 
symptoms are not relieved. The next step would be to prescribe an albuterol inhaler (Ventolin) or 
a combination inhaler. 
23.    Disease states are usually presented in their full-blown “classic” textbook presentations. 
 I  Example:   In a case of acute mononucleosis, the patient will most likely be a teen presenting with 
the classic triad of sore throat, prolonged fatigue, and enlarged cervical nodes. If the patient is 
older, but has the same signs and symptoms, it is still mononucleosis (reactivated type). 
24.    Ethnic background may give a clue for some diseases. 
 I  Example:   Alpha thalassemia is more common among Southeast Asians (such as Filipinos). Beta 
thalassemia is more common in Mediterranean people. 
14    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
25.    No asymptomatic or “borderline” cases of disease states are presented in the test. 
 I  Example:   In real life, most patients with iron-de/f_i  ciency anemia are asymptomatic and do not 
have either pica or spoon-shaped nails. In the exam, they will probably have these clinical 
/f_i  ndings plus the other /f_i  ndings of anemia. 
26.    Become familiar with lupus or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 
 I  Example:   A malar rash (butter/f_l  y rash) is present in most patients with lupus. These patients 
should be advised to avoid or minimize sunlight exposure (photosensitivity). 
27.    Become familiar with polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR). 
 I  Example:   First-line treatment for PMR includes long-term steroids. Long-term, low-dosed 
steroids are commonly used to control symptoms (pain, severe stiffness in shoulders and hip 
girdle). PMR patients are also at higher risk for temporal arteritis. 
28.     The gold-standard exam for temporal arteritis is a biopsy of the temporal artery. Refer the patient to 
an ophthalmologist for management. 
29.    Learn the disorders for which maneuvers are used and what a positive report signi/f_i  es. 
 I  Example:   Finkelstein’s test—positive in De Quervain’s tenosynovitis. Anterior drawer 
maneuver and Lachman maneuver—positive if anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) of the knee is 
damaged. The knee may also be unstable. McMurray’s sign—positive in meniscus injuries of the 
knee. 
30.    Some conditions need to be evaluated with a radiologic test. 
 I  Example:   Damaged joints: Order an x-ray /f_i  rst (but MRI is the gold standard). 
31.     The abnormal eye /f_i  ndings in diabetes (diabetic retinopathy) and hypertension (hypertensive reti-
nopathy) should be memorized. Learn to distinguish each one. 
 I  Example:   Diabetic retinopathy: neovascularization, cotton wool spots, and microaneurysms. 
Hypertensive retinopathy: atrioventricular (AV) nicking, silver and/or copper wire 
arterioles. 
32.    Become knowledgeable about physical exam “normal” and “abnormal” /f_i  ndings. 
 I  Example:   When checking deep tendon re/f_l  exes (DTRs) in a patient with severe sciatica or diabetic 
peripheral neuropathy, the ankle jerk re/f_l  ex (Achilles re/f_l  ex) may be absent or hypoactive. 
Scoring: absent (0), hypoactive (1), normal (2), hyperactive (3), and clonus (4). 
33.    There are only a few questions on benign or physiologic variants. 
 I  Example:   A benign S4 heart sound may be auscultated in some elderly patients. A geographic 
tongue, torus palatinus, and /f_i  shtail uvula may be seen during the oral exam in a few 
patients. 
34.    Some commonly used drugs have rare (but potentially life-threatening) adverse effects. 
 I  Example:   A rare but serious adverse effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) is 
angioedema. A common side effect of ACEIs is a dry cough (up to 10%). 
35.    Learn about the preferred and/or /f_i  rst-line drug used to treat some diseases. 
 I  Example:   ACEIs or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are the preferred drugs to treat 
hypertension in diabetics and patients with renal disease because of their renal-protective 
properties. 
36.     When medications are used in the answer options, they will be listed either by name (generic and 
brand name) or by drug class alone. 
 I  Example:   Instead of using the generic/brand name of ipratropium (Atrovent), it may be listed as 
a drug class (an anticholinergic). 
37.    Most of the drugs mentioned in the exam are the well-recognized drugs. 
 I  Examples:    Additional examples are listed in Chapters 2 and 3.
 G Penicillin:  Amoxicillin (broad-spectrum penicillin), penicillin VK 
 G Macrolide:  Erythromycin, azithromycin (Z-Pack), or clarithromycin (Biaxin) 
 G Cephalosporins:  First-generation (Ke/f_l  ex), second-generation (Cefaclor, Ceftin, Cefzil), third-
generation (Rocephin, Suprax, Omnicef) 
 G Quinolones:  Cipro/f_l  oxacin (Cipro), o/f_l  oxacin (Floxin) 
 G Quinolones with gram-positive coverage:  Levo/f_l  oxacin (Levaquin), moxi/f_l  oxacin (Avelox), 
gati/f_l  oxacin (Tequin) 
 G Sulfa:  Trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim, Septra), nitrofurantoin (Macrobid) 
 G Tetracyclines:  Tetracycline, doxycycline, minocycline (Minocin) 
 G Nonsteroidal anti-in/f_l  ammatory drug (NSAID):  Ibuprofen, naproxen (Aleve, Anaprox) 
 G COX-2 inhibitor: Celecoxib (Celebrex) 
1. CERTIFICATION EXAM INFORMATION    15
38.    Category B drugs are allowed for pregnant or lactating women. 
 I  Example:   For pain relief, pick acetaminophen (Tylenol) instead of NSAIDs such as ibuprofen 
(Advil) or naproxen (Aleve, Anaprox). Avoid nitrofurantoin and sulfa drugs during the third 
trimester (these increase risk of hyperbilirubinemia). 
39.     The preferred treatment for cutaneous anthrax is cipro/f_l  oxacin 500 mg orally twice a day for 60 days or 
8 weeks. If the patient is allergic to cipro/f_l  oxacin, use doxycycline 100 mg twice a day. Cutaneous 
anthrax is not contagious; it comes from touching fur or animal skins that are contaminated with 
anthrax spores. 
40.  Approximately 15% of the questions will be about infants and children.  
 IExample:  The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommend s that breastfed infants should be 
started on vitamin D during the /f_i  rst few days of l ife; then at age 4 months, iron-supplementation 
is recommended (formula contains vitamins/minerals so no need to supplement).
41. A common question design regarding pediatrics is to query about growth and development norms 
(or abnormal).
 IExample:  At the age of 6 months, infants can sit without support; roll over front to back, then 
from back to front; transfer objects from one hand to the other; use a raking grasp; and babble.
42. Physical exam /f_i  ndings in children that are abnormal with serious consequences might be included. 
 IExample:  Leukocoria (white color) is noted on one eye while checking for the red re/f_l  ex. Rule out 
retinoblastoma of the eye, which is a malignant tumor of the retina. 
43.    There are some questions on theories and conceptual models. 
 I  Example:   Stages of change or “decision” theory (Prochaska) include concepts such as 
precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance (see Chapter 26). 
44.   Other health theorists who have been included on the exams in the past are (not inclusive) 
Alfred/uni00A0Bandura (self-ef/f_i  cacy), Erik Erikson, Sigmund Freud, Elisabeth Kübler-Ross (grieving), and 
others. 
 I  Example:   If a small child expresses a desire to marry a parent of the opposite sex, the child is in 
the oedipal stage (Freud). The child’s age is about 5 to 6 years (preschool to kindergarten). 
45.     Starting at the age of about 11 years, most children can understand abstract concepts (early abstract 
thinking) and are better at logical thinking. 
 I  Example:   When performing the Mini-Mental State Exam, when the NP is asking about 
“proverbs,” the nurse is assessing the patient’s ability to understand abstract concepts. 
46.   Keep these good communication rules in mind:  Ask open-ended questions; do not reassure patients, 
avoid angering them, and respect their culture. There may be two or three questions relating to 
“abuse” (e.g., child abuse, domestic abuse, elderly abuse). 
47.   Follow national treatment guidelines for certain disorders. Following is a list of treatment guidelines 
used as references by the ANCC and the AANPCB. *  
 I  Asthma:   Global Initiative for Asthma. (2020). 2020 GINA Report, Global Strategy for Asthma 
Management and Prevention. https://ginasthma.org/gina-reports/. 
 I  COPD:   Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. (2020).   Global strategy for the 
diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic ob structive pulmonary disease, 2020 . 
 I  Diabetes:    American Diabetes Association Standards of medical care in diabetes. (2020). Diabetes 
Care, 43 (Suppl. 1), S14–S31. 
 I  Ethics:    Fowler, M. (2015). Guide to the code of ethics for nurses with interpr etive statements: 
Development, interpretation, and application   (2nd ed.). Nursesbooks.org. 
 I  Healthy People:   Of/f_i ce of Disease Promotion and Health Prevention. (2010).  Healthy People 2030.   
https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/browse-objectives. 
 I  Health Promotion:    U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce
.org/uspstf/ . 
 I  Hyperlipidemia:   2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/
NLA/PCNA Guideline on the Management of Blood Cholesterol: A Report of the ACC/AHA 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation , 139(25). 
 I  Hypertension:   2017 Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of 
High Blood Pressure in Adults: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. (2018). Journal of the American 
College of Cardiology , 71, e127–e248. 
* Not an all-inclusive list.
16    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
 I  Mental Health:   American Psychiatric Association. (2013).  Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental disorders   (5th ed.). American Psychiatric Publishing. 
 I  Pediatrics:   American Academy of Pediatrics. (2017).  Bright futures: Guidelines for health supervision 
of infants, children, and adolescents   (E-book; 4th ed.). 
 I  STDs (or Sexually Transmitted Infections):   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). 
 Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines  . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
48.     The ANCC exam has several questions about evidence-based medicine that are designed in the drag-
and-drop format. For important facts, review Chapter 2 to become familiar with this format, as well 
as Chapter 30 for important facts. 
49.     If the question is asking for the initial or screening lab test, it will probably be a “cheap” and readily 
available test such as the complete blood count (CBC) to screen for anemia. 
   MAXIMIZING YOUR SCORE 
1.    The /f_i  rst answer that “pops” in your head is usually the correct answer. 
2.    If you are guessing, pick an answer at random. Try not to change it unless you are sure. 
3.    Use the “/f_l  ag” command so that you can return to the question later when you complete the exam. 
4.    Avoid changing too many answers. If you are not sure, then leave the answer alone. I advise my 
students not to change more than three answers. 
5.    Avoid choosing exotic diseases as answers if you are guessing. Remember, these are tests for primary 
care conditions. 
6.    One method of guessing is to look for a pattern. Pick the answer that does not /f_i  t the pattern. Another 
is to pick the answer that you are most “attracted” to. Go with your gut feeling, and do not change 
the answer unless you are very sure. 
7.    Remind yourself to read slowly and carefully thr oughout the test. Avoid reading questions too 
rapidly. Make sure that you understand the stem of the question (usually the last sentence of a 
question). 
8.    If you are having problems choosing or understanding the answer options, try to read them from the 
bottom up (from option D to A, or from 4 to 1). 
9.    Eliminate the wrong answers after you have read all the answer options. If an answer option con-
tains all-inclusive words ( all ,  none  ,  every  ,  never  ,  none  ), then it is probably wrong. 
10.    Be careful with certain words such as  always  ,  exactly  ,  often  ,  sometimes  , and  mostly  . 
11.     Assume that each question has enough information to answer it correctly. Questions and answers are 
carefully designed. Take the facts at face value. 
12.   The /f_i  rst few questions are usually harder to solve. This is a common test design. Do not let it shake 
your con/f_i  dence. (Guess the answer and “mark” it so that you can return to it later.) 
13.   Save yourself time (and mental strain) by reading the last sentence (or stem) of long questions and 
case scenarios  /f_i rst . Then read the question again from the beginning. The advantage of this “back-
ward reading” technique is that you know ahead of time what the question is asking for. When you 
read it again “normally,” it becomes easier to recognize important clues that will help you answer 
the question. 
14.   Just because a statement or an answer is true does not mean that it is the correct answer. If it does not 
answer the stem of the question, then it is the wrong answer. 
15.   Design and memorize your “scratch paper” a few weeks before you take the exam. Choose what you 
want on it wisely. Remember to keep it brief. 
16.   Use the time left from the “free” computer tutorial time to write down the facts that you memorized 
for your scratch paper. If you run out of time, skip this step. 
17.   Some suggestions of facts to write down on the scratch paper are lab results (e.g., hemoglobin, hema-
tocrit, MCV , platelets, WBC count, neutrophil percentage, potassium, urinalysis). Other popular 
choices are the murmurs, mnemonics, and cranial nerves. 
18.     Do not leave any of the questions unanswered, because there is no penalty for guessing. Questions 
that are left blank are marked as errors (0 points). If you have only 30 minutes left and you are not 
done, quickly answer the remaining questions at random. 
19.     If you spend more than 60 seconds on a question, you are wasting time. Answer it at random and 
then “mark” it so that you can return to it later (after you /f_i  nish the entire test). 
20.     Consider a quick break (if you have enough time) if you get too mentally fatigued. Solving 150 to 
175 questions is pretty intense. If you feel “fuzzy” or tired, go to the bathroom and get a drink of 
1. CERTIFICATION EXAM INFORMATION    17
water, and splash cold water on your face. This can take <5 minutes. You can bring bottled water, but 
you have to leave it outside the testing area. 
21.   The countdown clock in the computer does not stop for breaks. Do not use more than 5 minutes for 
your quick bathroom break. 
22.   If you have failed the test before, try not to memorize what you did on the previous exam you took. 
The answers you remember may be wrong. Pretend that you have never seen the test before so that 
you can start out fresh mentally. 
23.     Do not panic or let your anxiety take over. Learn to use a calming technique, such as deep breathing, 
to calm yourself quickly before you take the exam. 
24.   Consider using a test-anxiety hypnosis CD and use it every night for at least 2 to 3 weeks for maxi-
mum effect. 
25.     One of the most important pieces of advice that I can give you is to make sure that you get enough 
sleep the night before the exam. Aim for at least 7 to 8 hours of sleep. Better yet, make sure that you 
get enough sleep a few nights before, not just the night before. 
26.   Before the test, practice answering questions and check the rationales afterward. The ANCC has free 
questions per specialty that you can take online and score. Buy practice questions from the ANCC or 
the AANPCB (depending on which test you are taking). 
27.   Check out the website allnurses.com and search for examination tips from others who have taken/
failed the FNP certi/f_i  cation exam. You can also do this directly by using a search engine such as 
Google. 
   PREPARING FOR THE EXAM 
 Review Timeline 
1.    Start seriously reviewing for the exam at least 3 months in advance. Study time can range from 2 to 3 
hours per session, or you can break it up into 1-hour segments. Be consistent. The best time to study 
is the time of day you are most alert. 
2.    Prepare a study schedule by organ system. Photocopy the table of contents of your primary care text-
book. Place check marks next to the diseases that you want to concentrate on and then schedule the 
date and time period for each organ system. 
3.    Concentrate your studies on your weaker areas. For example, if orthopedics is one of your weak areas, 
devote more time to it. Spend 3 days on orthopedics versus 1 day for the “easy” organ systems (since 
you understand them better). 
4.    I highly recommend that you attend at least one quality review course and buy CDs of another review 
course. I teach review courses live and by webinar. You can view my class schedule at my website at 
 www.npreview.com.  
5.    Buy a new notebook. If you /f_i  nd that you are having a problem understanding a concept, write it 
down in your notebook, then research it and /f_i  nd the answer to your question. 
6.    Meet with someone in your local area or by phone who is also taking the exam. Practice quizzing each 
other. 
7.    Note the disease and topics that I have highlighted in this review book. Some organ systems have 
more “weight” on the exam than others. Become more familiar with these areas. 
8.  If you are taking the ANCC exam, I highly recommend that you devote at least 30% of your study time 
learning about the nonclinical topics. 
9.  If you learn better in a group, organize one. Decide ahead of time what organ systems or diseases to 
cover together so that you do not waste time. 
 Testing Center Details 
After closing brie/f_l  y due to COVID-19, testing has resumed in many U.S . and Canada test centers, either at full or 
limited occupancy (based on local and government ma ndates). While in the testing center, you must wear  a mask 
at all times. Your temperature will be checked. If you are febrile or have COVID-like symptoms, call t he testing 
center for advice on how to reschedule your exam. 
1.     Call the testing center or con/f_i  rm your appointment online 4 weeks before to verify your appoint-
ment date and time. 
2.     Locate and drive to the testing center 1 to 2 weeks before taking the exam. Save the address of the 
testing center on your GPS or map app. 
18    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
3.     Arrive at least 45 to 60 minutes before your scheduled time so that you have enough time to park 
your car, locate the testing center, and check in for your appointment. Do not forget to bring your 
mask to the testing center. 
4.     Carry acceptable forms of unexpired primary ID (photo with signature). If you do not have the 
proper forms of identi/f_i  cation, you will not be allowed to take the exam. 
 I Driver’s license issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) 
 I State ID card issued by the DMV 
 I Passport 
 I U.S. military ID 
 I Your secondary ID (nonphoto):  Card with your name and signature (e.g., credit card, ATM card, 
Social Security card, voter registration card, employee ID) 
 I Expired IDs are not acceptable. 
 I The name that is printed on your primary ID must match the name that you used when you 
applied for the exam. 
 I Check that both your primary and secondary IDs and the letter with your Prometric 
identi/f_i  cation number match; make sure that all your IDs are inside your wallet/handbag. 
5.     Biometrics are used for enhanced security. The test-taking room is also monitored closely by video-
tape and microphones. Your glasses will be checked visually, and you will be asked to show your 
arms and ankles, as well as empty your pockets from an agreed-upon safe distance. 
6.     A whiteboard (8.5 × 11 inches) with a marker, or scratch paper and a pencil, is given to you by the 
testing center staff (and collected after you are done). If you are given paper and tend to write a lot, 
ask for extra paper. 
7.    You can request noise-reducing headsets or earplugs; consider this option if you are sensitive to 
noise. 
8.    Cell phones, watches, cameras, pagers, jewelry (except for engagement and/or wedding ring), and 
food or drink are not allowed inside the testing area. 
9.    Testing computers are predetermined. Each test-taker is assigned one small cubicle with one com-
puter. If you are having problems seeing the computer screen, bring it to the proctor’s attention as 
soon as possible. 
10.     Verify that you are given the correct examination as soon as you sit down. Check that the title and 
the examination code on the screen match the information sent by the testing agency for your NP 
specialty. 
11.     No food or drink is allowed inside the testing room. But you can bring in a drink and food (e.g., 
snack bar) and place it outside the locker (on top of the locker) so that you do not have to open your 
locker. You are not permitted to unlock your locker during the testing period. 
12.     If you need to go to the restroom, you must /f_i  rst sign out with the proctor/testing staff. Remember, 
the time clock will continue to count down the time. It does not stop for breaks. 
13.    Do not forget your glasses if you need them to read text on the computer. 
 The Night Before the Exam 
1.    Avoid eating a heavy meal or consuming alcoholic drinks the night before the exam. Avoid eating 3 to 
4 hours before bedtime (prevents heartburn). 
2.    Get enough sleep. Aim for at least 7 to 8 hours. Getting adequate sleep is probably one of the most 
important things you can do to help you pass the exam. 
3.    If you are scheduled to take your exam in the morning, set two alarms to wake you up on time. Give 
yourself extra time if it is a weekday (traf/f_i  c congestion). 
 The Day of the Exam 
1.    Avoid eating a heavy breakfast or eating only simple carbs. The best meals are a combination of a pro-
tein with a complex carbohydrate (e.g., eggs, whole-wheat bread, nuts, cheese). If you eat only simple 
carbs, you can become hypoglycemic within 1 hour. 
2.    If you get drowsy and “fuzzy” during the exam, there are several ways to “wake up” rapidly. Excuse 
yourself and go the bathroom to splash cold water on your face. You can perform 10 to 20 “jumping 
jacks.” Drinking cold water, a caffeinated beverage, or coffee can be very helpful. (However, don’t 
drink too much.) 
3.  Avoid drinking too much /f_l  uid and do not forget to empty your bladder before the exam. 
1. CERTIFICATION EXAM INFORMATION    19
4.  Wear comfortable clothing and dress in layers in case of temperature changes. 
5.    Jewelry is not allowed inside the testing area, except for wedding and/or engagement rings. 
   OTHER TEST-TAKING ISSUES 
 Test Anxiety 
 It is normal to feel anxious before taking an exam. A little anxiety helps us to become alert and vigilant, 
but too much anxiety can wear you down both emotionally and physically. 
 Your internal perception about how well you will do on the exam is very important. If you tend to 
become very anxious (or you are now more anxious because you previously failed the exam), there are 
calming methods that may prove helpful in controlling your anxiety. Following are some suggestions to 
help reduce test-taking anxiety a few weeks before the exam. 
1.    Make sure that you have devoted enough time for your review studies. If you feel in your gut that you 
have not studied “enough” or that you are not ready, it will worsen anxiety. 
2.  Consider signing up for both the ANCC and AANPCB exams. It can help to reduce your anxiety level 
because you feel like you have a “backup” exam. 
3.    If you have a /f_i  rm job offer, I recommend that you sign up for both the exams to decrease test-taking 
anxiety. 
4.  Consider taking one or two review courses. My review courses and webinars are listed at my website 
at  www.npreview.com.  
5.  Avoid negative “self-talk.” When you catch yourself doing it, silently tell yourself to “Stop it! Right 
now!” 
6.  Improve the nutritional content of your diet, especially about 4 weeks before the exam. Vitamins and 
supplements that may be helpful to the brain include omega-3 capsules (/f_i  sh oil); B-complex vitamins; 
vitamins C, D, and E; and choline. 
7.  Hypnotherapy audio /f_i  les are sold online for use in portable-player devices. For maximum effective-
ness, it is best to listen to them daily for 2 to 4 weeks. 
8.  “Tapping” is another method used to counteract test anxiety (or increase self-con/f_i  dence). The tech-
nique is demonstrated in videos posted on YouTube. 
 Your Panic Button 
 If you /f_i  nd yourself feeling panicky during the exam, try the following calming technique. Practice this 
exercise at home until you feel comfortable doing it. 
  Breathing Exercise  
1.    Close your eyes. During inhalation, tell yourself gently, “I am breathing in calmness.” Then hold your 
breath and count from 1 to 3. 
2.  During exhalation, tell yourself gently, “I am breathing out fear,” while counting from 1 to 5. 
3.  Inhale deeply through your nose and exhale slowly through your mouth. 
4.    Complete one cycle of three inhalations and three exhalations. Repeat as needed.  

21 2   Question Dissection  
and Analysis    
 EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE 
 I. Discussion 
 Questions about evidence-based medicine (EBM) are typically designed in “drag-and-drop” format on 
the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) exam. They are presented as two boxes with three 
sections each. The example that follows illustrates this format. On the left side, three types of article 
summaries (or research studies) are marked A, B, and C (in the exam, they will appear as blue boxes). On 
the right side, you will see the rankings from 1 to 3 (in the exam, they will be yellow boxes). You “drag” 
one of the articles from the left-hand box into the correct ranking or hierarchy in the right-hand box. 
Your job is to rank the three research article summaries as 1, 2, or 3 (best evidence, moderate evidence, 
weakest evidence). 
 II. Example  
Article Summaries Strength of Evidence (strongest to weakest)
 A.  A meta-analysis on MEDLINE and Cochrane databases that 
found 53 RCTs about gingko biloba use in patients with early 
dementia  1. 
 B.  A specialty society opinion paper regarding the effectiveness of 
gingko biloba supplementation in dementia  2. 
 C.  An experimental study on 500 patients with early dementia 
who were given gingko biloba daily for 6 months versus the 
control group, which was given placebo pills  3. 
 RCTs, randomized controlled trials. 
 III. Correct Answer 
 Article A is ranked 1, Article C is ranked 2, and Article B is ranked 3. 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
 I teach a three-step system to students in my review courses: 
  I First, identify the research study that has the hi ghest/best level of evidence (#1 ranking). An easy 
way to do this is by searching for keywords in the question such as  meta-analysis  ,  systematic review  , 
or  randomized controlled trials   (RCTs) combined with  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR)  , 
 MEDLINE®  database, and/or Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL®). 
  I Next, look for the research study that has the weakest evidence (#3 ranking). It usually contains 
keywords such as  expert opinion   or  specialty society  . 
  I Therefore, view the study that is leftover as having the middle ranking (#2 ranking). In addition, 
keep in mind that if the choices do not include a meta-analysis or systemic review, then the study 
with the highest ranking would be an RCT or an experimental study. The ANCC exams usually 
have several of this type of question. Further discussion about EBM appears in Chapter 30. 
  I The levels of evidence rankings are: 
 GG Meta-analysis and/or systematic reviews (Cochrane/MEDLINE/CINAHL/PubMed) 
22    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
  GG RCTs (used for testing medical treatment effectiveness, subjects assigned at random to either a 
control or treatment group) 
  GG Experimental studies (control group, intervention group, randomization) 
  GG Cohort/case control studies 
  GG Retrospective chart reviews 
  GG Expert/specialty society opinions 
 PHOTOGRAPHS 
 I. Discussion 
 On the ANCC exam, expect to see several color photographs of skin conditions and a few on the eyes/
fundi. In the future, there may be pictures from other organ systems. The stem of the question usually 
will ask for the possible diagnosis, differential diagnosis, or type of treatment. If you plan to take the 
ANCC exam, you need to memorize how a skin condition or eye /f_i  nding appears in a color photo. It is a 
good idea to use a search engine (e.g., Google) to look for the images. For example, you want to become 
familiar with skin cancers, such as basal cell carcinoma and melanoma, and funduscopic /f_i  ndings in 
diabetes and hypertension. 
 II. Example 
 The nurse practitioner (NP) is performing a routine physical exam on a 54-year-old White male farmer 
who is an immigrant from Australia. The NP notices a round skin lesion on the patient’s head. It has a 
/f_i rm texture with indurated edges and telangiectasia (Figure 2.1). The patient reports that the lesion does 
not itch, but it has slowly enlarged over the past few years. Which of the following conditions is most 
likely in this patient? 
  A.  Nodular melanoma 
  B.  Squamous cell carcinoma 
  C.  Basal cell carcinoma 
  D.  Actinic keratosis 
   Figure 2.1   Sample exam photograph.
Source:  National Cancer Institute  
     III. Correct Answer: Option C 
  C.  Basal cell carcinoma 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I Notice that the skin lesion has a pearly or waxlike (shiny) appearance with telangiectasia, which is 
“classic” for basal cell carcinoma; some lesions may show central ulceration. 
  I Patient has risk factors for skin cancer, such as light-colored skin, and he is from Australia, which 
has high rates of skin cancer. 
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    23
  I The skin lesion is located on a sun-exposed area. 
  I It is probably not nodular melanoma, which usually has  pigment such as brown  or black color with 
irregular borders. 
  I   Actinic keratosis is a precancer of squamous cell carcinoma and is usually located on the scalp 
(males), face, and back of the hands (dorsum); they appear as a crusty/scaly growth that slowly 
enlarges over time. 
  I The gold-standard test for skin cancer is the skin biopsy. 
 MULTIPLE-CHOICE QUESTIONS WITH MORE THAN ONE 
CORRECT RESPONSE 
 I. Discussion 
 Expect to see some multiple-choice questions with /f_i  ve or six answer options in both the ANCC and 
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certi/f_i  cation Board (AANPCB) exams. The question will 
ask for two or three correct answers. For example, you may be asked to pick two or three differential 
diagnoses for a case of skin rash. The clues are given in the presentation of the signs and symptoms. 
 II. Example 
 A 75-year-old woman with mild dementia, hyperlipidemia, and emphysema is brought in by her middle-
aged daughter as a walk-in patient in a community clinic with a complaint of a sudden onset of red 
rashes on her left lower arm and hand. During the skin exam, the NP notes that there are a few blisters. 
When the NP touches one of the blisters, it ruptures and drains clear serous /f_l  uid. Which of the following 
three conditions should the NP consider in the differential diagnosis? 
  A.  Contact dermatitis 
  B.  Erysipelas 
  C.  Psoriasis 
  D.  Impetigo 
  E.  Thermal burn 
 III. Correct Answer: Options A, D, and E 
  A.  Contact dermatitis 
  D.  Impetigo 
  E.  Thermal burn 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I Easily ruptured blisters (fragile) is a classic /f_i  nding for bullous impetigo, an acute bacterial skin 
infection caused by  Staphylococcus  or  Streptococcus  . 
  I Contact dermatitis can present with just red skin or red skin with blisters. The rash can be located 
anywhere on the body, and it may have a pattern (like a belt) or no pattern. 
  I The timing of the rash is very important. Is it acute or chronic? Rule out option C (psoriasis), which 
is a chronic skin disease. 
  I Erysipelas is a type of cellulitis caused by strep. It resembles a bright-red, warm, raised rash 
(plaque-like) with discrete borders usually located on the face or the shins. Blistering is not present. 
  I A thermal burn is a burn caused by heat (e.g., /f_i  re, heat). Consider a second-degree burn in the 
differential diagnosis because of its acute onset. Also, the patient has mild dementia, which puts her 
at a higher risk for accidents. 
 DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING 
 I. Discussion 
 Questions about diagnostic imaging tests may appear on the exam. You may get a multiple-choice 
question alone or a question that is accompanied by a chest x-ray /f_i  lm. I recommend that you use a search 
engine (e.g., Google) to search for images of chest /f_i  lms with lobar consolidation due to community-
acquired pneumonia (CAP), right middle lobe pneumonia, pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) infection, and 
emphysema/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
24    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
 II. Example 
 A 34-year-old male smoker presents in an urgent care clinic complaining of a productive cough, chest 
congestion, fever, chills, and poor appetite for 1 week. Cough is productive of greenish sputum, which 
is sometimes tinged with a small amount of blood. Vital signs are temperature of 101.2°F, pulse of 100 
beats/min, respirations of 24 breaths/min, and blood pressure (BP) of 122/88 mmHg. A radiograph of 
the chest is obtained (Figure 2.2). What is the most likely diagnosis in this patient? 
      A.  Acute bronchitis 
  B.  Right middle lobe pneumonia 
  C.  Right lower lobe pneumonia 
  D.  Legionella pneumonia 
  Figure 2.2   Sample exam photo. 
 III. Correct Answer: Option B 
  B.  Right middle lobe pneumonia 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I The signs and symptoms of CAP include fever and cough productive of green sputum with a small 
amount of blood (or rust-colored sputum). Rust-colored sputum is associated with  Streptococcus 
pneumoniae   infection. 
  I Most of the middle lobe of the right lung is in the anterior chest by the right nipple area. Notice that 
lobar consolidation is located in the same area. 
  I Patients with acute bronchitis may have chest congestion but not fever, chills, or productive cough 
with purulent sputum. 
  I Legionella pneumonia (Legionnaire’s disease) is uncommon in primary care. Look for a history of 
exposure to “nebulized” water sources (e.g., air conditioners, fountains). Presents with pneumonia 
signs/symptoms that are accompanied by gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms (diarrhea, nausea/
vomiting). 
 CULTURE 
 I. Discussion 
 There will be several questions on the ANCC exam that address culture. The questions will address 
knowledge of cultural practices that in/f_l  uence health-seeking behavior. Some of the cultures that may 
be included in the ANCC exam are Hispanic/Latino, Muslim, Chinese, Native American (Navajo), and 
Southeast Asian (Vietnamese, Hmong, Filipinos, and others). 
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    25
 II. Example 
 An elderly woman immigrant from Vietnam who recently has been diagnosed with hypertension is 
returning for a 4-week follow-up visit. The patient is on a prescription of hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg 
daily. Her BP during the visit is 150/94 mmHg. The NP queries the patient about whether she is taking 
her medication. The patient looks down at the /f_l  oor and does not directly answer the question. Which of 
the following statements regarding the health behaviors of Southeast Asians is incorrect? 
  A.  The patient may have dif/f_i  culty verbalizing questions about their treatment. 
  B.  The patient may ask to consult with an older family member about major health decisions. 
  C.   If the patient is not compliant with taking medications, they will not directly communicate it to the 
health provider. 
  D.  The patient will directly verbalize their disagreement in a loud voice. 
 III. Correct Answer: Option D 
  D.  The patient will directly verbalize their disagreement in a loud voice. 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I The patient’s behavior (aggressive, loud) is considered rude in most Asian cultures. 
  NOTES  
  1.  The Hmong ethnic group that immigrated to the United States came from several countries 
(e.g., Laos, Vietnam, Thailand). A traditional household has a male (i.e., father) who is the head of 
the household. The family identiﬁ  es with a clan group, which is headed by an older male. 
  2.  For major health decisions, the head of the family is always involved. If the father is dead, then 
another older male relative (e.g., uncle) may be consulted. 
  3.  Most Asians have high regard for physicians (and college education). Because of this cultural value, 
they may not directly disagree or question the healthcare provider. 
  4.  Asian Americans and Paciﬁ  c Islanders are 8 to 13 times more likely to develop liver cancer than 
other groups because of higher rates of chronic hepatitis B infection. 
 LAB RESULTS AND DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
 I. Discussion 
 Laboratory tests, such as hemoglobin and hematocrit, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), total white 
blood cell (WBC) count, percentage of neutrophils in the WBC differential, thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH), prostate-speci/f_i  c antigen (PSA), and urinalysis (UA), are commonly encountered in the exams. 
Learn the signi/f_i  cance of the abnormal results and the follow-up tests that are needed to evaluate them 
further. 
 The AANPCB exam does list the norms for some of the common laboratory tests. They will appear 
only when needed to answer a question (such as an anemia question).  
 In contrast, the ANCC does not list any of the normal results in its certi/f_i  cation exams. Therefore, if you 
plan to take the ANCC exam, it is important that you memorize the normal results of these laboratory 
tests. 
 Be warned that lab results are also used as distractors; the labs listed may not be necessary to solve 
the exam question correctly. The normal results for these labs are also included in the pertinent review 
chapters of this book (e.g., TSH will be found in Chapter 9). 
 II. Example 
 An elderly man of Mediterranean descent has a routine complete blood count (CBC) done for an annual 
physical. The following are his lab test results: hemoglobin is 12.0 g/dL, hematocrit is 39%, and MCV 
is 72 fL. His PSA result is 3.2 ng/mL. UA shows no leukocytes and few epithelial cells. Which of the 
following laboratory tests are indicated for this patient? 
26    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
  A.    Serum iron, serum ferritin, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), and the red cell distribution width 
(RDW) 
  B.   Serum vitamin B 12  and folate level with a peripheral smear 
  C.   CBC with white cell differential and UA 
  D.   Urine culture and sensitivity with microscopic exam of the urine (Tables 2.1 and 2.2) 
 III. Correct Answer: Option A 
  A.    Serum iron, serum ferritin, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), and the red cell distribution width 
(RDW) 
  Table 2.1  List of Laboratory Norms (Adults)    
  CBC    Reference Ranges   
 Hemoglobin 
 Males  13.0–17.5 g/dL 
 Females  12.0–16 g/dL 
 Hematocrit 
 Males  40%–50% 
 Females  36%–45% 
 MCV  80–100 fL 
 RDW  >14.5% 
 Platelet count  <150,000/mm 3  (increased risk of bleeding, disseminated intravascular 
coagulation) 
 Reticulocytes  0.5%–1.5% of red cells ( ↑ acute bleeding), starting treatment for vitamin 
deﬁ  ciencies (iron, B 12 , folate), acute hemolytic episodes 
 Total WBC count  4,500–11,000/mm 3  (↑ bacterial infections) 
 Neutrophils (or segs)  55%–70% ( ↑ bacterial infections) 
 Band forms (immature WBCs)  >5% (↑ severe bacterial infections) 
 Also called “shift to the left” 
 Eosinophils  >3% (↑ allergies, parasitic diseases, cancer) 
 CBC, complete blood count; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; RDW, red cell distribution width; WBC, white blood cell.  
  Table 2.2   List of Blood Chemistries    
  Laboratory Test     Reference Ranges   
 TSH  >5.0 mU/L (hypothyroidism) 
 <0.4 mU/L (hyperthyroidism) 
 PSA  <4.0 ng/mL (benign prostatic hyperplasia [BPH], prostate cancer) 
 Ferritin  <15 mcg/L (iron-deﬁ  ciency anemia) 
 ESR; sed rate  Men 0–22 mm/hr 
 Women 0–29 mm/hr 
 Elevated (giant cell arteritis, rheumatoid arthritis [RA], lupus, inﬂ  ammation) 
 CRP  Elevated (inﬂ  ammation, autoimmune diseases, a risk factor for heart disease) 
 cTnT  Elevated in myocardial infarction, heart damage, heart failure 
 Sensitive test for myocardial cell damage (myocardial infarction, unstable angina) 
 BNP  Elevated (elevated in heart failure) 
 Potassium  <3.5 or >5.5 mEq/L (critical values <2.5 or >8 mEq/L) 
 BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; CRP, c-reactive protein; cTnT, cardiac troponins; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; PSA, prostate-speciﬁ  c 
antigen; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.  
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    27
   IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I Low hemoglobin and hematocrit for gender (male) and age (abnormal CBC result) 
  I An MCV of 72 fL, which is indicative of microcytic anemia (assessment) 
  I The ethnic background of the patient (demographics) 
  I Ignore the UA and PSA tests because they are not necessary to solve the problem 
  NOTES  
 1. You must go through three steps to answer this question correctly: 
 G  First step:   A hemoglobin of <13.5 g/dL in males (but not in females) is indicative of anemia. 
An MCV of 72 fL is indicative of microcytic anemia (norm 80–100 fL). 
 G  Second step:   The MCV will direct you in the differential diagnosis (microcytic, normocytic, or 
macrocytic). 
 G  Third step:   The differential diagnosis for microcytic anemia is iron deﬁ  ciency and alpha or beta 
thalassemia trait or minor for the exams. 
 2. In iron-deﬁ  ciency anemia, the following results are found: 
 G Serum ferritin and serum iron levels: Decreased 
 G TIBC and RDW: Elevated 
 3. In alpha or beta thalassemia trait or minor, the following results are found: 
 G Serum ferritin and serum iron levels: Normal 
 G TIBC: Normal  
 4. The gold-standard test to diagnose any anemia involving abnormal hemoglobin (e.g., thalassemia, 
sickle cell) is the hemoglobin electrophoresis. 
 5. The RDW is a measure of the variability in size of red blood cells (RBCs; or anisocytosis). An el-
evated RDW is one of the earliest indicators of iron-deﬁ  ciency anemia. 
 6. In clinical practice, rule out iron-deﬁ  ciency anemia ﬁ  rst (most common anemia in the world for all 
ages/races/gender) before ordering a hemoglobin electrophoresis. 
 PHARMACOLOGIC CONCEPTS 
 I. Discussion 
 The current version of the exams includes more topics about pharmacology. To solve a question, you 
need to understand key terms, their de/f_i  nitions, and how they are applied. There are no math problems 
where you must /f_i  gure out the correct dose of a drug. See Chapter 3 for further discussion. 
 II. Examples 
  I Deprescribing:  The process of adjusting the dose of a medication down to the minimum effective 
dosage or stopping it when it is no longer needed (or if the patient’s health status has changed). 
Deprescribing helps to decrease polypharmacy, especially in the geriatric population. For example, 
there are evidence-based deprescribing guidelines for proton-pump inhibitors and benzodiazepines, 
which can be found online.
  IPharmacogenomics/pharmacogenetics:  Your genes affect how you respond (or do not respond) to a 
drug. It is now known that certain genes affect how the body metabolizes certain drugs. It allows us 
to truly “individualize” medicine. 
  IPharmacokinetics:  The process by which a medication is absorbed, distributed, metabolized, and 
eliminated by the body.
  IHalf-life:  Amount of time it takes for a drug concentration to reduce to half of its original dose.
  IFirst-pass metabolism (/f_i  rst-pass effect):  When an oral drug reaches the stomach, it goes to the small 
intestines, then to the portal circulation where it is metabolized by the liver. After the liver has 
metabolized the drug, it is released to the systemic circulation where it can reach the target 
organ(s).  
28    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
 WOMEN’S HEALTH 
 I. Discussion 
 Expect to see several questions addressing gynecological conditions. The topics that are covered include 
recognizing and treating sexually transmitted infections or diseases (STIs or STDs), oral contraceptive 
issues, abnormal Pap smears, menopausal conditions, threatened abortion or early pregnancy, and many 
more. For example, there will be questions about vaginal disorders, such as bacterial vaginosis (BV), 
candida vaginitis, trichomoniasis, and atrophic vaginitis. In pregnant patients, use only medications that 
are FDA Category A or B or those that have no adverse effect on pregnancy and lactation. 
 Be aware that a clinical /f_i  nding can be described in detail instead of using its common name. For 
example, the term  clue cell   is not used in the question that follows. Instead, it is described in detail 
(“mature squamous epithelial cells with numerous bacteria on the cell surface and borders”). 
 II. Example 
 An 18-year-old female student presents in the college health clinic complaining of a strong odor in her 
vagina. She reports that she had an abortion about 3 weeks ago and recently completed her prescription 
of antibiotics. The NP performs a vaginal speculum exam and notes a large amount of gray to off-white 
discharge coating the patient’s vaginal walls. It has a milk-like consistency. During microscopy, the slide 
reveals mature squamous epithelial cells with numerous bacteria on the cell surface and borders. The 
vaginal pH is 6.0. Which of the following conditions is most likely? 
  A.   Trichomoniasis 
  B.   BV 
  C.   Candida vulvovaginitis 
  D.   Hormonal changes 
 III. Correct Answer: Option B 
  B.   BV 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I The vaginal pH is alkaline (pH of 6.0). 
  I Rule out  Candida   because it is classi/f_i  ed as a yeast organism (not a bacteria). 
  I Rule out  Trichomonas   because it is a protozoan or unicellular /f_l  agellated organism. 
  I The odor and discharge are not due to hormonal changes in an 18-year-old. 
  NOTES  
 1. BV has an alkaline pH (vagina normally has an acidic pH of 3.5–4.5). BV is the only vaginal condi-
tion with an alkaline pH for the exam. 
 2. BV is not considered an STD (it is caused by an imbalance of vaginal bacteria). The sex partner does 
not need to be treated. It is a vaginosis (not a vaginitis). 
 3. BV does not cause inﬂ  ammation (the vulvovagina will not be red or irritated). The microscopy slide 
will have very few WBCs and a large number of clue cells. 
 4. The vaginal discharge in  Candida   infection is a white color with a thick and curdlike consistency. It 
frequently causes redness and itching in the vulvovagina because of inﬂ  ammation. 
 5. The microscopy in candidiasis will show a large number of WBCs, pseudohyphae, and spores 
(“spaghetti and meatballs”). 
 6. Candida yeast is a normal ﬂ  ora of the GI tract and in some women’s vaginas. 
 7.  Trichomonas   infection (or trichomoniasis) vaginal discharge is copious, bubbly, and green in color. It 
causes a lot of inﬂ  ammation, resulting in itching and redness of the vulvovagina. It is considered to 
be an STI. The sex partner also needs treatment. 
 8. PCR testing is now available for trichomonas and vaginal candida infections. For trichomonas, a 
urine specimen (males or females) is used. For vaginal candida, a vaginal swab is used. 
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    29
 MEDICATIONS 
 I. Discussion 
 When studying pharmacology for the exam, it is generally not important to memorize the speci/f_i  c drug 
doses. What is more important is to study a drug’s “safety” issues, such as contraindications, major 
drug/food interactions, and well-known side effects. 
 You will need to be familiar with the drug’s indications and the duration of treatment. Become familiar 
with a “/f_i  rst-line drug” and the alternative drug (if applicable). For example, the /f_i  rst-line (or preferred) 
drug for treating “strep” throat is still penicillin V PO × 10 days. If the patient has a penicillin allergy, 
macrolides and clindamycin can be used instead. 
 The majority of the medicines seen on the exam are the well-known drugs that have been in use for 
a few years to many decades (e.g., doxycycline, penicillin, amoxicillin). Memorize drug class and some 
representative drugs from that class. For example, in the quinolone drug class are drugs such as o/f_l  oxacin 
(Floxin), moxi/f_l  oxacin (Avelox), and levo/f_l  oxacin (Levaquin). A drug’s brand name may not be used 
on the exam; instead, only the drug’s generic name or drug class may be used. In addition, you need 
to become familiar with some of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) category X drugs (see 
Chapter 3). 
 II. Examples 
  Example A  
 Using the drug class as the answer option: 
 A previously healthy 30-year-old complains of an acute onset of fever and chills accompanied by a 
productive cough with purulent sputum and a loss of appetite. The patient denies receiving an antibiotic 
in the previous 3 months. The NP diagnoses CAP . The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 
and the American Thoracic Society (ATS) treatment guidelines recommend which of the following as the 
preferred /f_i  rst-line treatment for this patient? 
  A.   Macrolides 
  B.   Antitussives 
  C.   Cephalosporins 
  D.   Fluoroquinolones with gram-positive bacteria activity 
  Example B  
 Which of the following antibiotics is the preferred treatment for healthy adults diagnosed with 
uncomplicated CAP? 
  A.   Azithromycin (Zithromax Z-Pak 250 mg) 500 mg on day 1, then 250 mg daily for 4 days 
  B.   Dextromethorphan with guaifenesin (Robitussin DM) 1 to 2 teaspoons PO QID as needed 
  C.   Cephalexin (Ke/f_l  ex) 500 mg PO QID × 10 days 
  D.   Levo/f_l  oxacin (Levaquin) 500 mg PO daily × 7 days 
  Example C  
 The following is an example of a question about a common side effect: 
 Which of the following are possible side effects that may be seen in a patient who is being treated with 
hydrochlorothiazide for hypertension? 
  A.   Dry cough and angioedema 
  B.   Swollen ankles and headache 
  C.   Hyperuricemia and hyperglycemia 
  D.   Fatigue and depression 
 III. Correct Answers 
  Example A: Option A  
  A.   Macrolides 
30    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
  Example B: Option A  
  A.   Azithromycin (Zithromax Z-Pak 250 mg) 500 mg on day 1, then 250 mg daily for 4 days 
  Example C: Option C  
  C.   Hyperuricemia and hyperglycemia 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I Lack of comorbidity (“healthy adults”) is an important clue in Examples A and B. 
  I Your knowledge of the latest IDSA and the ATS treatment guidelines helps to correctly answer 
Examples A and B (covered in Chapter 8). 
  I For Example C, you must memorize the adverse side effects of thiazide diuretics. 
  NOTES  
 1. According to the IDSA and the ATS treatment guideli nes, outpatient treatment of CAP in healthy 
patients (no comorbidities) involves the macrolides  (azithromycin, clarithromycin, or erythromycin). 
 2. Example A is caused by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. Look for a sudden or new 
onset of a dry cough in a patient with hypertension (without signs of the common cold). Angio-
edema is a rare adverse effect and can be life-threatening. 
 3. Example B is caused by calcium channel blockers (CCBs). Look for a hypertensive patient with swol-
len ankles (not associated with heart failure) and headache. 
 4. Example C is caused by thiazide diuretics (hyperuricemia and hyperglycemia). 
 5. Example D is caused by beta-blockers. Look for a patient with a history of myocardial infarction 
(MI), heart failure, and/or hypertension who complains of increased fatigue and depression 
(avoid if possible in depressed patients, pulse <50 beats/min, second- or third-degree heart 
block). 
  U.S. CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL 
AND PREVENTION STATISTICS  
 I. Discussion 
 It is important that you memorize the following U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
statistics. The questions will be short and to the point. Determine whether a question is asking about 
the most common cause of death (mortality) or whether it is asking about the most common cause of 
a certain disease in a population (prevalence). For example, the most common cause of cancer death 
overall is lung cancer (mortality), but the most common cancer overall (prevalence) is skin cancer. The 
most common type of skin cancer is basal cell skin cancer. 
 Sometimes, a question will ask about a gender-speci/f_i  c cause. For example, the most common cancer 
in females is breast cancer, and the most common cancer in males is prostate cancer (prevalence). But the 
cancer causing the most deaths overall for both males and females is still lung cancer (mortality). 
  Mortality Statistics  
  I Disease causing the most deaths overall:  Heart disease 
  I Cancer with the highest mortality:  Lung cancer 
  I Cancer with the highest mortality in males and females:  Lung cancer 
  I Most common cause of death in adolescents:  Motor vehicle crashes 
  Prevalence  
  I Most common cancer in females:  Breast cancer 
  I Most common cancer in males: Prostate cancer 
  I Most common type of cancer overall (males/females):  Skin cancer 
  I Most common type of skin cancer (males/females):  Basal cell cancer 
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    31
  I Skin cancer with the highest mortality:  Melanoma 
  I Gynecological cancer (vulva, vagina, cervix, uterus, ovary): 
  GG Uterine/endometrial cancer (most common gynecological cancer) 
  GG Ovarian cancer (second most common gynecological cancer) 
 II. Example 
 What is the most common type of gynecological cancer? 
  A.   Uterine cancer 
  B.   Cervical cancer 
  C.   Breast cancer 
  D.   Ovarian cancer 
 III. Correct Answer: Option A 
  A.   Uterine cancer 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I This question is based on your recall of facts that you memorized (rote memory). 
  I Rule out breast cancer because it is not considered a gynecological cancer. 
  NOTES  
 1. There may be a question about the gynecological cancers (see example). These types of cancers are 
located in the pelvis (labia, vagina, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries). 
 2. Breast cancer is not classiﬁ  ed as a gynecological cancer. 
 BENIGN PHYSIOLOGIC VARIANTS 
 I. Discussion 
 A benign variant is a physiologic abnormality that does not interfere with bodily processes or functions. 
There are very few questions on benign variants. Some examples of the benign variants that have 
been seen on the exams include the geographic tongue,  t orus palatinus, and a split or /f_i  shtail uvula 
(see Chapter 5). Benign variants are listed under the appropriate organ system. 
   II. Example 
 A 45-year-old female patient complains of a sore throat. Upon examination, the NP notices a bony growth 
midline at the hard palate of the mouth. The patient denies any changes or pain. It is not red, tender, 
or swollen. She reports a history of the same growth for many years without any change. Which of the 
following conditions is most likely? 
  A.   Torus palatinus 
  B.   Geographic tongue 
  C.   Acute glossitis 
  D.   Leukoplakia 
 III. Correct Answer: Option A 
  A.   Torus palatinus 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I The description of a chronic bony growth located midline in the hard palate indicates torus 
palatinus. 
  I Rule out glossitis, geographic tongue, and hairy leukoplakia because they are all located on the 
tongue and not on the hard palate (roof of the mouth) .
32    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
  NOTES  
 1. A torus palatinus is a benign growth of bone (an exostosis) located midline on the hard palate and 
covered with normal oral skin. It is painless and does not interfere with function. 
 2. A “geographic tongue” has multiple ﬁ  ssures and irregular smoother areas on its surface that make 
it look like a topographic map. The patient may complain of soreness on the tongue after eating or 
drinking acidic or hot foods. 
 3. Leukoplakia is not a benign variant. It appears as a slow-growing white plaque that has a ﬁ  rm to 
hard surface that is slightly raised on the tongue or inside the mouth. It is considered a 
precancerous lesion. It is due to chronic irritation of the skin or precancerous changes on the 
tongue and inside the cheeks. Its causes include poorly ﬁ  tting dentures, chewing tobacco (snuff), 
and using other types of tobacco. Refer the patient for a biopsy because it can sometimes become 
malignant. 
 4. Oral hairy leukoplakia (OHL) of the tongue is a painless white patch (or patches) that appears cor-
rugated. It is usually located on the lateral aspects of the tongue (or other areas inside the mouth) 
and is associated with HIV and AIDS infection. It is caused by Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection of 
the tongue. It is not considered a premalignant lesion. 
 U.S. PREVENTIVE SERVICES  TASK FORCE 
SCREENING GUIDELINES 
 I. Discussion 
 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) screening guidelines are graded as A, B, C, D, or I 
(insuf/f_i  cient evidence or evidence is lacking or of poor quality). The highest rating is a Grade A (routine 
screening is advised—high certainty that the net bene/f_i  t is substantial). A rating of Grade D means 
that the harm outweighs the bene/f_i  ts (or there is no bene/f_i  t) to the service and the use of the service is 
discouraged. 
 Both the ANCC and the AANPCB exams use the USPSTF screening recommendations. Regarding 
breast cancer screening, the  USPSTF (2018)  currently recommends that a screening baseline mammogram 
(with or without clinical breast exam) start at age 50 years and then every 2 years until the age of 
74 years. For women aged 40 to 49 years, mammograms should be based on individual factors (such as 
risk factors, preferences, risk vs. bene/f_i  ts of mammograms). 
 II. Example 
 What is the USPSTF screening recommendation for ovarian cancer? 
  A.  Annual bimanual pelvic exam with pelvic ultrasound 
  B.  Pelvic and intravaginal ultrasound 
  C.  Intravaginal ultrasound with CA-125 tumor marker 
  D.  The USPSTF does not recommend routine screening of women for ovarian cancer (Grade D) 
 III. Correct Answer: Option D 
  D.  The USPSTF does not recommend routine screening of women for ovarian cancer (Grade D) 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I Do not “overread” the question. Assume that the question is asking about routine screening of the 
general population. 
  I Transvaginal ultrasound and CA-125 are not used for routine screening. 
  I Although the bimanual pelvic exam is “low tech,” it is being used as a distractor. 
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    33
  NOTES  
 1. The  USPSTF (2018)  is against routine screening for ovarian cancer in asymptomatic women who 
are not known to have a high risk of hereditary cancer syndrome. 
 2. If there is a case scenario of an older woman who complains of vague abdominal/pelvic symptoms 
(stomach bloating, low-back ache, constipation) and is found to have a palpable ovary during the 
bimanual exam, rule out ovarian cancer. 
 3. Always rule out ovarian cancer in a postmenopausal woman who has a palpable ovary. 
 4. The next step is to order a pelvic and intravaginal ultrasound with CA-125. Refer to an oncologist. 
 5. The strongest risk factor for ovarian cancer (or breast cancer) is genetic predisposition, such as 
 BRCA1   or  BRCA2   mutations and positive family history (Table 2.3). Absolute risk of developing 
ovarian cancer is 35% to 45% in women with  BRCA1   mutation. Other risk factors are age, obesity, 
clomiphene (Clomid) use, and early-age menarche or late-onset  menopause. 
  Table 2.3   USPSTF Screening Guidelines    
  Disease     Screening Test   
 Breast cancer (2018)  Baseline mammogram at age 50 years 
 Screen every 2 years until age 74 years (biennial) 
 After age 75 years (insufﬁ  cient evidence) 
 Cervical cancer (2018)  Baseline Pap smear/cytology at age 21 years (do not screen younger) 
 Screen every 3 years until age 65 years; at age 30–65 years, another option 
is to screen every 5 years using hrHPV testing alone or in combination 
with cytology (cotesting). 
 Lung cancer (2013)  Aged 55–80 years with 30 pack-year history of smoking or quit smoking 
up to 15 years previously 
 Annual screening with LDCT 
 Hysterectomy (no cervix)  Do not screen (if no history of precancer or cervical cancer) .
 Prostate cancer (2018)  Aged 55–69 years, PSA-based screening should be individualized; ≥70 years, 
against prostate cancer screening. 
 Testicular cancer (2011)  Routine screening is not recommended. 
 Colorectal cancer (2016)  Baseline screening at age 50 years 
 Use  high-sensitivity   fecal occult blood test (yearly) or sigmoidoscopy 
(every 5 years) or colonoscopy (every 10 years) from age 50 to 
75 years; aged 76–85 years, individualize. 
 Skin cancer (2016)  Current evidence insufﬁ  cient to assess beneﬁ  ts/harms of visual skin exam. 
 Educate fair-skinned persons to avoid sunlight (10 a.m.–3 p.m.) and use 
sunblock ≥SPF 15. 
 Tobacco smoking (2020)  Ask all adults about tobacco use, advise them to stop smoking, and provide 
behavioral interventions/pharmacotherapy (if not pregnant) for smoking 
cessation. 
 Fall prevention in community-
dwelling older adults (2018)  Adults aged ≥65 years, exercise interventions to prevent falls in adults at 
increased risk; against vitamin D supplementation. 
 Ovarian cancer (2018)  Routine screening is not recommended .
 High-risk ( BRCA   mutation, family history of breast/ovarian cancer) are 
screened by specialist; refer for genetic counseling .
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm (2019)  One-time screening (men aged 65–75 years) for cigarette smokers or those 
who have quit. 
 Screening test is ultrasound of abdomen. 
 hrHPV, high-risk human papillomavirus; LDCT, low-dose computed tomography; SPF, sun protection factor; USPSTF, U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force.  
34    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
  FOLLOWING UP ON A PRESCRIPTION MEDICINE 
 I. Discussion 
 In these cases, a patient who is taking prescription medicine is running out of their supply or does not 
have re/f_i  lls left. The test-taker must decide what type of initial follow-up is needed. Depending on the 
case scenario, for a patient who is fully symptomatic due to the abrupt cessation of medicine (either due 
to running out of re/f_i  lls or due to discontinuation of health insurance), a reasonable initial action is to 
continue the prescription medicine. 
 II. Example 
 A 65-year-old female smoker presents with a history of Barrett’s esophagus and gastroesophageal 
re/f_l ux disease (GERD). The patient reports that her gastroenterologist’s prescription for esomeprazole 
(Nexium) 40 mg daily ran out a few days ago. She is complaining of severe heartburn and a sore throat. 
During the physical exam, the NP notes an erythematous posterior pharynx without tonsillar discharge 
and mild dental enamel loss on the rear molars. What is the best initial action for the NP to follow? 
  A.   Refer the patient to an oncologist for a biopsy to rule out esophageal cancer. 
  B.    Give the patient a re/f_i  ll of her proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) prescription and advise her to schedule an 
appointment with her gastroenterologist. 
  C.    Recommend that the patient take over-the-counter (OTC) ranitidine (Zantac) twice a day until she 
can be seen by her gastroenterologist. 
  D.   Switch the patient’s prescription to another brand of PPI because her symptoms are not improving. 
 III. Correct Answer: Option B 
  B.   Give the patient a re/f_i  ll of her proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) prescription and advise her to schedule an 
appointment with her gastroenterologist. 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I Rule out option A because the patient is already under the care of a gastroenterologist. 
  I OTC ranitidine (Zantac) is not potent enough to control the symptoms of erosive esophagitis. A PPI 
is the preferred treatment for erosive esophagitis. 
  I Do not switch the patient to another brand of PPI. Her worsening symptoms are due to rebound 
caused by abrupt cessation of PPI. 
  I The best initial action in this case is to re/f_i  ll the PPI prescription because the patient is fully 
symptomatic (erosive esophagitis) until she can see her gastroenterologist. 
  NOTES  
 1. The patient’s severe symptoms are caused by the sudden discontinuation of the high-dose PPI 
(rebound type of reaction). 
 2. Barrett’s esophagus is the “precancerous” lesion of esophageal cancer. It is best managed by a 
gastroenterologist (not an oncologist). 
 3. Patients diagnosed with Barrett’s esophagus typically have endoscopic examinations with biopsy 
by a gastroenterologist annually (or every 6 months for high-grade lesions). 
 4. Patients with Barrett’s esophagus are treated with high-dose PPIs for a “lifetime.” 
 5. The ﬁ  rst-line treatment of mild, uncomplicated GERD is lifestyle changes (e.g., avoid eating 
3–4 hours before bedtime, dietary changes, weight loss if overweight). 
 6. If a patient is at high risk for esophageal cancer (aged 50 years or older, smoker, chronic GERD for 
decades), consider referral to a gastroenterologist for an upper endoscopy. 
 TANNER STAGES 
 I. Discussion 
 Expect to see at least one or two questions regarding Tanner stages in girls and boys. Because Tanner 
stage I is prepuberty and Tanner stage V is the adult pattern for both boys and girls, the only stages to 
memorize for the exams are Tanner stage II to Tanner stage IV . 
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    35
 For girls, memorize the pattern of breast development, and for boys, the genital development (testes 
and penis). It is not as important to memorize pubic hair development for both. 
  Tanner Stages  
 Girls 
  I  Stage I:   Prepubertal pattern 
  I  Stage II:   Breast bud and areola start to develop. 
  I  Stage III:   Breast continues to grow with nipples/areola (one mound/no separation). 
  I  Stage IV:   Nipples and areola become elevated from the breast (a secondary mound). 
  I  Stage V:   Adult pattern 
 Boys 
  I  Stage I:   Prepubertal pattern 
  I  Stage II:   Testes and scrotum start to enlarge (scrotal skin starts to get darker/more rugae). 
  I  Stage III:   Penis grows longer (length) and testes/scrotum continues to become larger. 
  I  Stage IV:   Penis become wider and continues growing in length (testes are larger with darker scrotal 
skin and more rugae). 
  I  Stage V:   Adult pattern 
 II. Example 
 A 14-year-old boy is brought in by his mother for a physical exam. Both are concerned about his breas t 
enlargement. The teen denies breast tenderness. On physical exam, the NP palpates soft breast tissue 
that is not tender. No dominant mass is noted. The skin is smooth, and there is no nipple discharge 
with massage. The teen has a body mass index (BMI) of 29. Which of the following statements is 
correct? 
  A.    Advise the mother that the patient has physiologic gynecomastia and should return for a follow-up 
exam. 
  B.   Order an ultrasound of both breasts to further assess the patient’s breast tissue development. 
  C.   Reassure the mother that the patient’s breast development is within normal limits. 
  D.   Educate the mother that her son has pseudogynecomastia. 
 III. Correct Answer: Option D 
  D.   Educate the mother that her son has pseudogynecomastia. 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I The boy is very overweight (BMI 29) and is almost obese. 
  I The clinical breast exam does not show palpable breast tissue. Instead, the breast palpation reveals 
soft fatty tissue. 
  I It is wrong to “reassure” a patient or family member in the exam (poor therapeutic communication 
technique). 
  NOTES  
 1.  Physiologic gynecomastia physical exam ﬁ  ndings will show disklike breast tissue that is mobile un-
der each nipple/areola; the breast may be tender, and the breast can be asymmetrical (one breast 
larger than the other). 
 2. A BMI of 25 to 29.9 is considered overweight. Obesity is a BMI of 30 or higher. 
 3. Overweight to obese males are at highest risk for pseudogynecomastia. 
 QUESTIONS ABOUT FOOD 
 I. Discussion 
 There are basically three kinds of food-related questions on the exam. You may be asked to pick the foods 
that have high levels of certain minerals, such as potassium, calcium, or magnesium. Other questions 
36    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
will address food interactions (tetracycline and dairy), drug interactions (monoamine oxidase inhibitor 
[MAOI] and high-tyramine-containing foods such as fermented foods), or foods that should be avoided 
for a particular disease (e.g., wheat products in the case of celiac disease). 
 Certain foods are recommended for certain diseases (e.g., salmon/omega-3 for heart disease) because 
of their favorable effect. In contrast, certain foods are contraindicated for some conditions because of 
their adverse or dangerous effects. 
 II. Example 
 Which of the following foods are known to have high potassium content? 
  A.   Low-fat yogurt, soft cheeses, and collard greens 
  B.   Aged cheese, red wine, and chocolate 
  C.   Potatoes, apricots, and Brussels sprouts 
  D.   Black beans, red meat, and citrus juice 
 III. Correct Answer: Option C 
  C.   Potatoes, apricots, and Brussels sprouts 
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I First, look at the answer options for inconsistencies in the list of foods. 
  I Rule out option A because it is inconsistent and these foods do not contain high levels of potassium: 
low-fat yogurt and soft cheeses (calcium) with collard greens (vitamin K). 
  I Rule out option B because these foods have a high tyramine, not potassium, content. 
  I Rule out option D because it is inconsistent. Although citrus juices are high in potassium, both black 
beans and red meat are not (iron). 
  I If options A, B, and D are incorrect, then the only one left is option C (potatoes, apricots, and 
Brussels sprouts). A large number of fruits and vegetables are rich in potassium and vitamins. 
  NOTES  
 1. Foods with a high tyramine content can cause dangerous food–drug interactions with MAOI inhibi-
tors (e.g., isocarboxazid [Marplan], phenelzine [Nardil], and tranylcypromine [Parnate]). 
 2. Foods and supplements containing stimulants, such as caffeine and ephedra, are best avoided by 
patients with hypertension, arrhythmias, high risk for MI, hyperthyroid disease, albuterol use, am-
phetamine use, and so on. 
 3. If one of the food choices in an answer option is incorrect, rule out this option because all of the 
foods on the list have to be correlated. 
  Examples of Food Groups  
 1. Gluten (avoid with celiac disease/celiac sprue):  Wheat (including spelt and kamut), rye, barley (breads, 
cereals, pasta, cookies, cakes) 
  GG Gluten free (safe carbohydrates):  Corn, rice, potatoes, quinoa, tapioca, soybeans 
 2. Plant sterols and stanols (reduce cholesterol, LDL, triglycerides):  Sterol-forti/f_i  ed spreads (Benecol spread), 
sterol-forti/f_i  ed foods, wheat germ, sesame oil 
 3 . Monounsaturated fats/fatty acids (decrease risk of heart disease): 
  GG Olive oil, canola oil, some nuts (almonds, walnuts), sun/f_l  ower oil/seeds 
  GG Mediterranean diet, which is high in monounsaturated fats 
 4. Saturated fats or trans fats (increase risk of hear t disease):  Lard, beef fat (fatty steak), deep-fried fast 
foods 
 5. Omega-3 or /f_i  sh oils (decrease risk of heart disease):  Fatty cold-water marine /f_i  sh (salmon), /f_i  sh oils, /f_l  ax-
seed oil, and krill oil 
 6. Magnesium (decreases BP , dilates blood vessels):  Some nuts (almonds, peanuts, cashews), some beans, 
whole wheat; also found in laxatives, antacids, milk of magnesia 
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    37
 7. Potassium (helps decrease BP):  Most fruits (especially apricot, banana, orange, prune juice), some 
vegetables 
 8. Folate (decreases homocysteine levels and fetal neural tube defects):  Breakfast cereals forti/f_i  ed with folate, 
green leafy vegetables (i.e., spinach), liver 
 9. Iron (treats iron-de/f_i  ciency anemia):  Beef, liver, black beans, black-eyed peas 
 10. Vitamin K (should control intake if on anticoagulants):  Green leafy vegetables (kale, collard greens, 
spinach), broccoli, cabbage 
 11. High sodium content (increases water retention, can increase BP):  Cold cuts, pickles, preserved foods, 
canned foods, hot dogs, chips 
 12. Calcium (helps with osteopenia and osteoporosis, helps decrease BP):  Low-fat dairy, low-fat milk, low-fat 
yogurt, cheeses 
  Common Disorders Associated With Certain Foods  
 1. Celiac disease 
  GG Lifetime avoidance of gluten-containing cereals such as wheat, rye, and barley is necessary. 
  GG Gluten free:  Rice, corn, potatoes, peanuts, soybeans, meat, dairy, all fruits/vegetables; most people 
with celiac disease can eat oats. 
 2. Hypertension 
  GG Maintain an adequate intake of calcium, magnesium, and potassium. 
  GG Calcium:  Low-fat dairy, low-fat yogurt, cheeses 
  GG Magnesium:  Wheat bread, nuts (almonds, peanuts, cashews), some beans 
  GG Potassium:  Most fruits (apricot, banana, oranges, cantaloupes, raisins), green vegetables 
  GG Avoid high-sodium foods:  Cold cuts, pickles, preserved foods, canned foods, preservatives 
 3. Migraine headaches and MAOIs (Marplan, Nardil, and Parnate) 
  GG High-tyramine foods:  Aged cheeses/meats, red wine, fava beans, draft beer, fermented foods 
 4. Anticoagulation therapy (i.e., warfarin sodium or Coumadin) 
  GG Avoid eating large amounts of leafy green vegetables (kale/collard greens, spinach, cabbage, 
broccoli) and cooking with canola oil (high in vitamin K); use other oils instead. High levels of 
vitamin K decrease the effects of warfarin sodium. 
 CASE MANAGEMENT 
 I. Discussion 
 Medical case managers are experienced RNs who work for hospitals, healthcare plans, and health 
insurance companies. Their job is essentially to coordinate the outpatient healthcare of patients with 
high-cost chronic conditions. The goal of case management is to decrease disease exacerbations and 
decrease the risk of hospitalization. 
  Asthma  
 A good outcome for children with asthma is their ability to attend school full time and to play normally 
every day. A poor case management outcome is if the child misses school and/or is unable to play 
because of poor control of asthma symptoms. 
  NOTES  
 1. With asthma, a good case outcome is for the child (or adult) to return to normal function. For 
children, it means the child is attending school and can play daily. If the child is not able to attend 
school full time (frequent absences), this is a poor case management outcome. 
 2. The risk factors for asthma fatality include a history of ED visits, frequent use of short-acting beta-
agonist use (i.e., albuterol), nocturnal awakenings, increased dyspnea and wheezing, respiratory 
viral infection, and so on. 
 3. Diseases that are selected for case management are usually chronic conditions, such as asthma, 
congestive heart failure (CHF), HIV infection, and chronic psychiatric conditions. A good outcome 
will show good symptom control and no exacerbations or hospitalizations. 
38    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
 ALL QUESTIONS HAVE ENOUGH INFORMATION 
 I. Discussion 
 Assume that all the questions on the exams contain enough information to answer them correctly. Do not 
read too much into a question or assume that it is missing some vital information. As far as the ANCC 
and AANPCB exams are concerned, all questions contain enough information to allow you to solve them 
correctly. Consider a patient is in good health unless a disease or other health condition is mentioned in 
the test question. 
 EMERGENT CASES 
 I. Discussion 
 The ability to recognize and initially manage emergent conditions that may present in the primary care 
arena is a skill that is expected of all NPs. It is important to memorize not only the presenting signs and 
symptoms of a given condition but also its initial management in primary care. 
 Learn how these conditions present so that you can recognize them in the exam. The following is a list 
of emergent conditions that will be on the exam. (They are discussed in detail in the “Danger Signals” 
sections of Chapters 5 through 17.) 
  Danger Signals  
 Cardiovascular System 
  I Acute MI, unstable angina 
  I Heart failure 
  I Bacterial endocarditis 
  I Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) 
 Skin and Integumentary System 
  I Angioedema/anaphylaxis 
  I Stevens–Johnson syndrome 
  I Meningococcemia 
  I Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) 
  I Lyme disease 
  I Herpes zoster ophthalmicus 
  I Melanoma 
  I Basal cell carcinoma 
 Gastrointestinal System 
  I Acute abdomen (surgical abdomen) 
  I Acute appendicitis 
  I Acute pancreatitis 
  I Acute diverticulitis 
  I Acute cholecystitis 
  I  Clostridium dif/f_i  cile infection  
  I Colon cancer 
  Men’s Health  
  I Testicular torsion 
  I Priapism 
  I Prostate cancer 
  Psychosocial Mental Health  
  I Depression with suicidal plan 
  I Acute serotonin syndrome 
  I Malignant neuroleptic syndrome 
2. QUESTION DISSECTION AND ANALYSIS    39
  Nervous System  
  I Cerebrovascular accident (CVA) 
  I Temporal arteritis headache 
  I Subarachnoid bleeding 
  I Acute bacterial meningitis 
  I Subdural hematoma 
  Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat  
  I Retinal detachment 
  I Orbital cellulitis 
  I Optic neuritis 
  I Peritonsillar abscess 
  I Battle sign 
  I Herpes keratitis 
  I Temporal arteritis 
  I Acute angle-closure glaucoma 
  Pulmonary System  
  I Anaphylaxis 
  I Severe asthmatic exacerbation (impending respiratory failure) 
  I Pulmonary emboli 
  I CAP 
  I Lung cancer 
  Renal System  
  I Acute pyelonephritis 
  I Acute renal failure 
  I Bladder cancer 
  Women’s Health  
  I Dominant breast mass attached to surrounding tissue 
  I Ruptured tubal ectopic pregnancy 
  I Paget’s disease of the breast 
  I Ovarian cancer 
 II. Example 
 An asthmatic male patient complains of a sudden onset of itching and coughing after taking two aspirin 
tablets for a headache in the waiting room. The patient’s lips and eyelids are becoming swollen. The 
patient complains of feeling hot. Bright-red wheals are noted on his chest and arms and legs. Which of 
the following is the best initial intervention to follow? 
  A.   Call 911. 
  B.   Check the patient’s BP , pulse, and temperature .
  C.    Give an injection of aqueous epinephrine 1:1,000 (1 mg/mL) 0.5 mg IM into the vastus lateralis 
muscle immediately .
  D.   Initiate a prescription of a potent topical steroid and a Medrol Dose Pack .
 III. Correct Answer: Option C 
  C.    Give an injection of aqueous epinephrine 1:1,000 dilution (1 mg/mL) 0.5 mg IM into the vastus late-
ralis muscle immediately .
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I The quick onset of symptoms, such as angioedema, after taking aspirin is a clue. 
  I The classic signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis described in this case should be noted. 
  I Severe anaphylactic episodes occur almost immediately or within 1 hour after exposure .
40    I. CERTIFICATION AND EXAM INFORMATION
  NOTES  
 1. Treatment of anaphylaxis (in primary care): 
 G If only one clinician is present:  Give an injection of epinephrine 1:1,000 dilution 0.3 to 0.5 mg 
intramuscularly  stat , and then call 911. May repeat dose within 5 minutes in case of poor response. 
 2. ED treatment medications:  Administer epinephrine IM, 100% oxygen by face mask, an antihista-
mine ( H 1  antagonist ) such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl), an H 2  antagonist such as ranitidine, a 
bronchodilator such as albuterol (short-acting beta-2 agonist), and systemic glucocorticosteroids 
such as prednisone. 
 3. Patients with an atopic history (asthma, eczema, allergic rhinitis) with nasal polyps are at higher 
risk for aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inﬂ  ammatory drug (NSAID) allergies. 
 4. Anaphylaxis is classiﬁ  ed as a type I IgE-dependent reaction. 
 5. Biphasic anaphylaxis occurs in up to 23% of cases (symptoms recur within 8–10 hours after initial 
episode). This is the reason why these patients are prescribed a Medrol Dose Pack and a long-acting 
antihistamine after being discharged from the ED. 
 6. The most common triggers for anaphylaxis in children are foods. Medications and insect stings are 
the most common triggers in adults. 
 PRIORITIZING OTHER EMERGENT CASES 
 I. Discussion 
 During life-threatening situations, managing the airway, breathing, and circulation (the ABCs) is always 
the top priority. If the question does not describe conditions requiring the ABCs, then the next level of 
priority is the acute or sudden change in the mental status and the level of consciousness (LOC). One 
of the most important clues in such problems is the acute timing of onset of symptoms or the sudden 
change of the LOC from the patient’s “baseline.” 
 II. Example 
 A 16-year-old boy presents to a community clinic accompanied by his grandmother, who reports that he 
fell off his bike this morning. The patient now complains of a headache with mild nausea. The patient’s 
grandmother reports that he was not wearing a helmet. The health history is uneventful. Which of the 
following statements is indicative of an emergent condition? 
  A.   The patient complains of multiple painful abrasions that are bleeding on his arms and legs .
  B.   The patient complains of a headache that is relieved by acetaminophen (Tylenol) .
  C.   The patient makes eye contact occasionally and answers with brief statements .
  D.   The patient is having dif/f_i  culty with following normal conversation and answering questions .
 III. Correct Answer: Option D 
  D.   The patient is having dif/f_i  culty with following normal conversation and answering questions .
 IV. Question Dissection 
  Best Clues  
  I History of recent trauma that is followed by a headache with nausea. 
  I The patient did not wear a bicycle helmet. 
  NOTES  
 1. Any recent changes in LOC, even one as subtle as difﬁ  culty with normal conversation, should ring a 
bell in your head. 
 2. Notice the words “normal conversation.” Do not overread the question and ask yourself what they 
mean by “normal conversation.” Take it at face valu e. 
 3. Changes in LOC on the test are usually subtle changes. Signs to watch for include difﬁ  culty answer-
ing questions, slurred speech, apparent confusion, inability to understand instructions/conversa-
tion, being sleepy/lethargic, and so forth. 
 4. Even though the patient is bleeding, note that he has “abrasions,” which are superﬁ  cial. 
 5. The behavior described in option C is considered “normal” for an adolescent male (or female). 
